Genesis 1
The Creation
1 In the beginning God (Elohim) created [by forming from nothing] the heavens and the earth. 2 The earth was formless and void or a waste and emptiness, and darkness was upon the face of the deep [primeval ocean that covered the unformed earth]. The Spirit of God was moving (hovering, brooding) over the face of the waters. 3 And God said, “Let there be light”; and there was light. 4 God saw that the light was good (pleasing, useful) and He affirmed and sustained it; and God separated the light [distinguishing it] from the darkness. 5 And God called the light day, and the darkness He called night. And there was evening and there was morning, one day. 6 And God said, “Let there be an expanse [of the sky] in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters [below the expanse] from the waters [above the expanse].” 7 And God made the expanse [of sky] and separated the waters which were under the expanse from the waters which were above the expanse; and it was so [just as He commanded]. 8 God called the expanse [of sky] heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.
9 Then God said, “Let the waters below the heavens be gathered into one place [of standing, pooling together], and let the dry land appear”; and it was so. 10 God called the dry land earth, and the gathering of the waters He called seas; and God saw that this was good (pleasing, useful) and He affirmed and sustained it. 11 So God said, “Let the earth sprout [tender] vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit according to (limited to, consistent with) their kind, whose seed is in them upon the earth”; and it was so. 12 The earth sprouted and abundantly produced vegetation, plants yielding seed according to their kind, and trees bearing fruit with seed in them, according to their kind; and God saw that it was good and He affirmed and sustained it. 13 And there was evening and there was morning, a third day.
14 Then God said, “Let there be light-bearers (sun, moon, stars) in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night, and let them be useful for signs (tokens) [of God’s provident care], and for marking seasons, days, and years; 15 and let them be useful as lights in the expanse of the heavens to provide light on the earth”; and it was so, [just as He commanded]. 16 God made the two great lights—the greater light (the sun) to rule the day, and the lesser light (the moon) to rule the night; He made the [galaxies of] stars also [that is, all the amazing wonders in the heavens]. 17 God placed them in the expanse of the heavens to provide light upon the earth, 18 to rule over the day and the night, and to separate the light from the darkness; and God saw that it was good and He affirmed and sustained it. 19 And there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
20 Then God said, “Let the waters swarm and abundantly produce living creatures, and let birds soar above the earth in the open expanse of the heavens.” 21 God created the great sea monsters and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarmed according to their kind, and every winged bird according to its kind; and God saw that it was good and He affirmed and sustained it. 22 And God blessed them, saying, “Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.” 23 And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
24 Then God said, “Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to (limited to, consistent with) their kind: livestock, crawling things, and wild animals of the earth according to their kinds”; and it was so [because He had spoken them into creation]. 25 So God made the wild animals of the earth according to their kind, and the cattle according to their kind, and everything that creeps and crawls on the earth according to its kind; and God saw that it was good (pleasing, useful) and He affirmed and sustained it.
26 Then God said, “Let Us (Father, Son, Holy Spirit) make man in Our image, according to Our likeness [not physical, but a spiritual personality and moral likeness]; and let them have complete authority over the fish of the sea, the birds of the air, the cattle, and over the entire earth, and over everything that creeps and crawls on the earth.” 27 So God created man in His own image, in the image and likeness of God He created him; male and female He created them. 28 And God blessed them [granting them certain authority] and said to them, “Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the earth, and subjugate it [putting it under your power]; and rule over (dominate) the fish of the sea, the birds of the air, and every living thing that moves upon the earth.” 29 So God said, “Behold, I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the surface of the entire earth, and every tree which has fruit yielding seed; it shall be food for you; 30 and to all the animals on the earth and to every bird of the air and to everything that moves on the ground—to everything in which there is the breath of life—I have given every green plant for food”; and it was so [because He commanded it]. 31 God saw everything that He had made, and behold, it was very good and He validated it completely. And there was evening and there was morning, a sixth day.

Genesis 2
The Creation Of Man And Woman
1 So the heavens and the earth were completed, and all their hosts (inhabitants). 2 And by the seventh day God completed His work which He had done, and He rested (ceased) on the seventh day from all His work which He had done. 3 So God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it [as His own, that is, set it apart as holy from other days], because in it He rested from all His work which He had created and done.
4 This is the history of [the origin of] the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day [that is, days of creation] that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens— 5 no shrub or plant of the field was yet in the earth, and no herb of the field had yet sprouted, for the LORD God had not caused it to rain on the earth, and there was no man to cultivate the ground, 6 but a mist (fog, dew, vapor) used to rise from the land and water the entire surface of the ground— 7 then the LORD God formed [that is, created the body of] man from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and the man became a living being [an individual complete in body and spirit]. 8 And the LORD God planted a garden (oasis) in the east, in Eden (delight, land of happiness); and He put the man whom He had formed (created) there. 9 And [in that garden] the LORD God caused to grow from the ground every tree that is desirable and pleasing to the sight and good (suitable, pleasant) for food; the tree of life was also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the [experiential] knowledge (recognition) of [the difference between] good and evil.
10 Now a river flowed out of Eden to water the garden; and from there it divided and became four [branching] rivers. 11 The first [river] is named Pishon; it flows around the entire land of Havilah, where there is gold. 12 The gold of that land is good; bdellium (a fragrant, valuable resin) and the onyx stone are found there. 13 The name of the second river is Gihon; it flows around the entire land of Cush [in Mesopotamia]. 14 The third river is named Hiddekel (Tigris); it flows east of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
15 So the LORD God took the man [He had made] and settled him in the Garden of Eden to cultivate and keep it. 16 And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, “You may freely (unconditionally) eat [the fruit] from every tree of the garden; 17 but [only] from the tree of the knowledge (recognition) of good and evil you shall not eat, otherwise on the day that you eat from it, you shall most certainly die [because of your disobedience].”
18 Now the LORD God said, “It is not good (beneficial) for the man to be alone; I will make him a helper [one who balances him—a counterpart who is] suitable and complementary for him.” 19 So the LORD God formed out of the ground every animal of the field and every bird of the air, and brought them to Adam to see what he would call them; and whatever the man called a living creature, that was its name. 20 And the man gave names to all the livestock, and to the birds of the air, and to every animal of the field; but for Adam there was not found a helper [that was] suitable (a companion) for him. 21 So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam; and while he slept, He took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh at that place. 22 And the rib which the LORD God had taken from the man He made (fashioned, formed) into a woman, and He brought her and presented her to the man. 23 Then Adam said,
“This is now bone of my bones,
And flesh of my flesh;
She shall be called Woman,
Because she was taken out of Man.”
24 For this reason a man shall leave his father and his mother, and shall be joined to his wife; and they shall become one flesh. 25 And the man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed or embarrassed.

Genesis 3
The Fall Of Man

1 Now the serpent was more crafty (subtle, skilled in deceit) than any living creature of the field which the LORD God had made. And the serpent (Satan) said to the woman, “Can it really be that God has said, ‘You shall not eat from any tree of the garden’?” 2 And the woman said to the serpent, “We may eat fruit from the trees of the garden, 3 except the fruit from the tree which is in the middle of the garden. God said, ‘You shall not eat from it nor touch it, otherwise you will die.’” 4 But the serpent said to the woman, “You certainly will not die! 5 “For God knows that on the day you eat from it your eyes will be opened [that is, you will have greater awareness], and you will be like God, knowing [the difference between] good and evil.” 6 And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was delightful to look at, and a tree to be desired in order to make one wise and insightful, she took some of its fruit and ate it; and she also gave some to her husband with her, and he ate. 7 Then the eyes of the two of them were opened [that is, their awareness increased], and they knew that they were naked; and they fastened fig leaves together and made themselves coverings.
8 And they heard the sound of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool [afternoon breeze] of the day, so the man and his wife hid and kept themselves hidden from the presence of the LORD God among the trees of the garden. 9 But the LORD God called to Adam, and said to him, “Where are you?” 10 He said, “I heard the sound of You [walking] in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked; so I hid myself.” 11 God said, “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten [fruit] from the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?” 12 And the man said, “The woman whom You gave to be with me—she gave me [fruit] from the tree, and I ate it.” 13 Then the LORD God said to the woman, “What is this that you have done?” And the woman said, “The serpent beguiled and deceived me, and I ate [from the forbidden tree].” 14 The LORD God said to the serpent,
“Because you have done this,
You are cursed more than all the cattle,
And more than any animal of the field;
On your belly you shall go,
And dust you shall eat
All the days of your life.
15 “And I will put enmity (open hostility)
Between you and the woman,
And between your seed (offspring) and her Seed;
He shall [fatally] bruise your head,
And you shall [only] bruise His heel.”
16 To the woman He said,
“I will greatly multiply
Your pain in childbirth;
In pain you will give birth to children;
Yet your desire and longing will be for your husband,
And he will rule [with authority] over you and be responsible for you.”
17 Then to Adam the LORD God said, “Because you have listened [attentively] to the voice of your wife, and have eaten [fruit] from the tree about which I commanded you, saying, ‘You shall not eat of it’;
The ground is [now] under a curse because of you;
In sorrow and toil you shall eat [the fruit] of it
All the days of your life.
18 “Both thorns and thistles it shall grow for you;
And you shall eat the plants of the field.
19 “By the sweat of your face
You will eat bread
Until you return to the ground,
For from it you were taken;
For you are dust,
And to dust you shall return.”
20 The man named his wife Eve (life spring, life giver), because she was the mother of all the living. 21 The LORD God made tunics of [animal] skins for Adam and his wife and clothed them.
22 And the LORD God said, “Behold, the man has become like one of Us (Father, Son, Holy Spirit), knowing [how to distinguish between] good and evil; and now, he might stretch out his hand, and take from the tree of life as well, and eat [its fruit], and live [in this fallen, sinful condition] forever”— 23 therefore the LORD God sent Adam away from the Garden of Eden, to till and cultivate the ground from which he was taken. 24 So God drove the man out; and at the east of the Garden of Eden He [permanently] stationed the cherubim and the sword with the flashing blade which turned round and round [in every direction] to protect and guard the way (entrance, access) to the tree of life.

Genesis 4
Cain And Abel

1 Now the man Adam knew Eve as his wife, and she conceived and gave birth to Cain, and she said, “I have obtained a man (baby boy, son) with the help of the LORD.” 2 And [later] she gave birth to his brother Abel. Now Abel kept the flocks [of sheep and goats], but Cain cultivated the ground. 3 And in the course of time Cain brought to the LORD an offering of the fruit of the ground. 4 But Abel brought [an offering of] the [finest] firstborn of his flock and the fat portions. And the LORD had respect (regard) for Abel and for his offering; 5 but for Cain and his offering He had no respect. So Cain became extremely angry (indignant), and he looked annoyed and hostile. 6 And the LORD said to Cain, “Why are you so angry? And why do you look annoyed? 7 “If you do well [believing Me and doing what is acceptable and pleasing to Me], will you not be accepted? And if you do not do well [but ignore My instruction], sin crouches at your door; its desire is for you [to overpower you], but you must master it.” 8 Cain talked with Abel his brother [about what God had said]. And when they were [alone, working] in the field, Cain attacked Abel his brother and killed him.

9 Then the LORD said to Cain, “Where is Abel your brother?” And he [lied and] said, “I do not know. Am I my brother’s keeper?” 10 The LORD said, “What have you done? The voice of your brother’s [innocent] blood is crying out to Me from the ground [for justice]. 11 And now you are cursed from the ground, which has opened its mouth to receive your brother’s [shed] blood from your hand. 12 “When you cultivate the ground, it shall no longer yield its strength [it will resist producing good crops] for you; you shall be a fugitive and a vagabond [roaming aimlessly] on the earth [in perpetual exile without a home, a degraded outcast].” 13 Cain said to the LORD, “My punishment is greater than I can bear. 14 “Behold, You have driven me out this day from the face of the land; and from Your face (presence) I will be hidden, and I will be a fugitive and an [aimless] vagabond on the earth, and whoever finds me will kill me.” 15 And the LORD said to him, “Therefore, whoever kills Cain, a sevenfold vengeance [that is, punishment seven times worse] shall be taken on him [by Me].” And the LORD set a [protective] mark (sign) on Cain, so that no one who found (met) him would kill him.
16 So Cain went away from the [manifested] presence of the LORD, and lived in the land of Nod [wandering in exile], east of Eden.
17 Cain knew his wife [one of Adam’s descendants] and she conceived and gave birth to Enoch; and Cain built a city and named it Enoch, after the name of his son. 18 Now to Enoch was born Irad, and Irad became the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael became the father of Methushael, and Methushael became the father of Lamech. 19 And Lamech took for himself two wives; the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other, Zillah. 20 Adah gave birth to Jabal; he became the father of those [nomadic herdsmen] who live in tents and have cattle and raise livestock. 21 His brother’s name was Jubal; he became the father of all those [musicians] who play the lyre and flute. 22 Zillah gave birth to Tubal-cain, the smith (craftsman) and teacher of every artisan in instruments of bronze and iron. The sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
23 Lamech said to his wives,
“Adah and Zillah,
Hear my voice;
You wives of Lamech,
Listen to what I say;
For I have killed a man [merely] for wounding me,
And a boy [only] for striking (bruising) me.
24 “If Cain is avenged sevenfold [as the LORD said he would be],
Then Lamech [will be avenged] seventy-sevenfold.”

25 Adam knew [Eve as] his wife again; and she gave birth to a son, and named him Seth, for [she said], “God has granted another child for me in place of Abel, because Cain killed him.” 26 To Seth, also, a son was born, whom he named Enosh (mortal man, mankind). At that [same] time men began to call on the name of the LORD [in worship through prayer, praise, and thanksgiving].

Genesis 5
Descendants Of Adam

1 This is the book (the written record, the history) of the generations of [the descendants of] Adam. When God created man, He made him in the likeness of God [not physical, but a spiritual personality and moral likeness]. 2 He created them male and female, and blessed them and named them Mankind at the time they were created.
3 When Adam had lived a hundred and thirty years, he became the father of a son in his own likeness, according to his image, and named him Seth. 4 After he became the father of Seth, Adam lived eight hundred years and had other sons and daughters. 5 So Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years in all, and he died.
6 When Seth was a hundred and five years old, he became the father of Enosh. 7 Seth lived eight hundred and seven years after the birth of Enosh, and he had other sons and daughters. 8 So Seth lived nine hundred and twelve years, and he died.
9 When Enosh was ninety years old, he became the father of Kenan. 10 Enosh lived eight hundred and fifteen years after the birth of Kenan and had other sons and daughters. 11 So Enosh lived nine hundred and five years, and he died.
12 When Kenan was seventy years old, he became the father of Mahalalel. 13 Kenan lived eight hundred and forty years after the birth of Mahalalel and had other sons and daughters. 14 So Kenan lived nine hundred and ten years, and he died.
15 When Mahalalel was sixty-five years old, he became the father of Jared. 16 Mahalalel lived eight hundred and thirty years after the birth of Jared and had other sons and daughters. 17 So Mahalalel lived eight hundred and ninety-five years, and he died.
18 When Jared was a hundred and sixty-two years old, he became the father of Enoch. 19 Jared lived eight hundred years after the birth of Enoch and had other sons and daughters. 20 So Jared lived nine hundred and sixty-two years, and he died.

21 When Enoch was sixty-five years old, he became the father of Methuselah. 22 Enoch walked [in habitual fellowship] with God three hundred years after the birth of Methuselah and had other sons and daughters. 23 So all the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years. 24 And [in reverent fear and obedience] Enoch walked with God; and he was not [found among men], because God took him [away to be home with Him].
25 When Methuselah was a hundred and eighty-seven years old, he became the father of Lamech. 26 Methuselah lived seven hundred and eighty-two years after the birth of Lamech and had other sons and daughters. 27 So Methuselah lived nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and he died.
28 When Lamech was a hundred and eighty-two years old, he became the father of a son. 29 He named him Noah, saying, “This one shall bring us rest and comfort from our work and from the [dreadful] toil of our hands because of the ground which the LORD cursed.” 30 Lamech lived five hundred and ninety-five years after the birth of Noah and had other sons and daughters. 31 So all the days of Lamech were seven hundred and seventy-seven years, and he died.
32 After Noah was five hundred years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

Genesis 6
The Corruption Of Mankind

1 Now it happened, when men began to multiply on the face of the land, and daughters were born to them, 2 that the sons of God saw that the daughters of men were beautiful and desirable; and they took wives for themselves, whomever they chose and desired. 3 Then the LORD said, “My Spirit shall not strive and remain with man forever, because he is indeed flesh [sinful, corrupt—given over to sensual appetites]; nevertheless his days shall yet be a hundred and twenty years.” 4 There were Nephilim (men of stature, notorious men) on the earth in those days—and also afterward—when the sons of God lived with the daughters of men, and they gave birth to their children. These were the mighty men who were of old, men of renown (great reputation, fame).
5 The LORD saw that the wickedness (depravity) of man was great on the earth, and that every imagination or intent of the thoughts of his heart were only evil continually. 6 The LORD regretted that He had made mankind on the earth, and He was [deeply] grieved in His heart. 7 So the LORD said, “I will destroy (annihilate) mankind whom I have created from the surface of the earth—not only man, but the animals and the crawling things and the birds of the air—because it [deeply] grieves Me [to see mankind’s sin] and I regret that I have made them.” 8 But Noah found favor and grace in the eyes of the LORD.
9 These are the records of the generations (family history) of Noah. Noah was a righteous man [one who was just and had right standing with God], blameless in his [evil] generation; Noah walked (lived) [in habitual fellowship] with God. 10 Now Noah became the father of three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
11 The [population of the] earth was corrupt [absolutely depraved—spiritually and morally putrid] in God’s sight, and the land was filled with violence [desecration, infringement, outrage, assault, and lust for power]. 12 God looked on the earth and saw how debased and degenerate it was, for all humanity had corrupted their way on the earth and lost their true direction.
13 God said to Noah, “I intend to make an end of all that lives, for through men the land is filled with violence; and behold, I am about to destroy them together with the land. 14 Make yourself an ark of gopher wood; make in it rooms (stalls, pens, coops, nests, cages, compartments) and coat it inside and out with pitch (bitumen). 15 This is the way you are to make it: the length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, its width fifty cubits, and its height thirty cubits (450’ x 75’ x 45’). 16 You shall make a window [for light and ventilation] for the ark, and finish it to at least a cubit (eighteen inches) from the top—and set the [entry] door of the ark in its side; and you shall make it with lower, second and third decks. 17 For behold, I, even I, will bring a flood of waters on the earth, to destroy all life under the heavens in which there is the breath and spirit of life; everything that is on the land shall die. 18 But I will establish My covenant (solemn promise, formal agreement) with you; and you shall come into the ark—you and your [three] sons and your wife, and your sons’ wives with you. 19 And of every living thing [found on land], you shall bring two of every kind into the ark, to keep them alive with you; they shall be male and female. 20 Of fowls and birds according to their kind, of animals according to their kind, of every crawling thing of the ground according to its kind—two of every kind shall come to you to keep them alive. 21 “Also take with you every kind of food that is edible, and you shall collect and store it; and it shall be food for you and for them.” 22 So Noah did this; according to all that God commanded him, that is what he did.

Genesis 7
The Flood

1 Then the LORD said to Noah, “Come into the ark, you with all your household, for you [alone] I have seen as righteous (doing what is right) before Me in this generation. 2 Of every clean animal you shall take with you seven pair, the male and his female, and of animals that are not clean, two each the male and his female; 3 also of the birds of the air, seven pair, the male and the female, to keep the offspring alive on the surface of the earth. 4 “For in seven days I am going to cause it to rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights; and I will destroy (blot out, wipe away) every living thing that I have made from the surface of the earth.” 5 So Noah did all that the LORD commanded him.
6 Noah was six hundred years old when the flood (deluge) of water came on the earth [covering all of the land]. 7 Then Noah and his sons and his wife and his sons’ wives with him entered the ark to escape the flood waters. 8 Of clean animals and animals that are not clean and birds and fowls and everything that crawls on the ground, 9 they came [motivated by God] into the ark with Noah two by two, the male and the female, just as God had commanded Noah. 10 And after the seven days [God released the rain and] the floodwaters came on the earth. 11 In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, on the seventeenth day of the second month, on that same day all the fountains of the great deep [subterranean waters] burst open, and the windows and floodgates of the heavens were opened. 12 It rained on the earth for forty days and forty nights.
13 On the very same day Noah and Shem and Ham and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah’s wife and the three wives of his sons with them, entered the ark, 14 they and every animal according to its kind, all the livestock according to their kinds, every moving thing that crawls on the earth according to its kind, and every bird according to its kind, every winged thing of every sort. 15 So they went into the ark with Noah, two by two of all living beings in which there was the breath and spirit of life. 16 Those which entered, male and female of all flesh (creatures), entered as God had commanded Noah; and the LORD closed the door behind him.
17 The flood [the great downpour of rain] was forty days and nights on the earth; and the waters increased and lifted up the ark, and it floated [high] above the land. 18 The waters became mighty and increased greatly on the earth, and the ark floated on the surface of the waters. 19 The waters prevailed so greatly and were so mighty and overwhelming on the earth, so that all the high mountains everywhere under the heavens were covered. 20 [In fact] the waters became fifteen cubits higher [than the highest ground], and the mountains were covered. 21 All living beings that moved on the earth perished—birds and cattle (domestic animals), [wild] animals, all things that swarm and crawl on the earth, and all mankind. 22 Everything on the dry land, all in whose nostrils was the breath and spirit of life, died. 23 God destroyed (blotted out, wiped away) every living thing that was on the surface of the earth; man and animals and the crawling things and the birds of the heavens were destroyed from the land. Only Noah and those who were with him in the ark remained alive. 24 The waters covered [all of] the earth for a hundred and fifty days (five months).

Genesis 8
The Flood Abates

1 And God remembered and thought kindly of Noah and every living thing and all the animals that were with him in the ark; and God made a wind blow over the land, and the waters receded. 2 Also the fountains of the deep [subterranean waters] and the windows of the heavens were closed, the [pouring] rain from the sky was restrained, 3 and the waters receded steadily from the earth. At the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters had diminished. 4 On the seventeenth day of the seventh month [five months after the rain began], the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat [in Turkey]. 5 The waters continued to decrease until the tenth month; on the first day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains were seen.
6 At the end of [another] forty days Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made; 7 and he sent out a raven, which flew here and there until the waters were dried up from the earth. 8 Then Noah sent out a dove to see if the water level had fallen below the surface of the land. 9 But the dove found no place on which to rest the sole of her foot, and she returned to him to the ark, for the waters were [still] on the face of the entire earth. So he reached out his hand and took the dove, and brought her into the ark. 10 He waited another seven days and again sent the dove out from the ark. 11 The dove came back to him in the evening, and there, in her beak, was a fresh olive leaf. So Noah knew that the water level had subsided from the earth. 12 Then he waited another seven days and sent out the dove, but she did not return to him again.
13 Now in the six hundred and first year [of Noah’s life], on the first day of the first month, the waters were drying up from the earth. Then Noah removed the covering of the ark and looked, and the surface of the ground was drying. 14 On the twenty-seventh day of the second month the land was [entirely] dry. 15 And God spoke to Noah, saying, 16 “Go out of the ark, you and your wife and your sons and their wives with you. 17 “Bring out with you every living thing from all flesh—birds and animals and every crawling thing that crawls on the earth—that they may breed abundantly on the earth, and be fruitful and multiply on the earth.” 18 So Noah went out, and his wife and his sons and their wives with him [after being in the ark one year and ten days]. 19 Every animal, every crawling thing, every bird—and whatever moves on the land—went out by families (types, groupings) from the ark.
20 And Noah built an altar to the LORD, and took of every [ceremonially] clean animal and of every clean bird and offered burnt offerings on the altar. 21 The LORD smelled the pleasing aroma [a soothing, satisfying scent] and the LORD said to Himself, “I will never again curse the ground because of man, for the intent (strong inclination, desire) of man’s heart is wicked from his youth; and I will never again destroy every living thing, as I have done.
22 “While the earth remains,
Seedtime and harvest,
Cold and heat,
Winter and summer,
And day and night
Shall not cease.”

Genesis 9
Covenant Of The Rainbow

1 And God blessed Noah and his sons and said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth. 2 The fear and the terror of you shall be [instinctive] in every animal of the land and in every bird of the air; and together with everything that moves on the ground, and with all the fish of the sea; they are given into your hand. 3 Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you; I give you everything, as I gave you the green plants and vegetables. 4 But you shall not eat meat along with its life, that is, its blood. 5 For your lifeblood I will most certainly require an accounting; from every animal [that kills a person] I will require it. And from man, from every man’s brother [that is, anyone who murders] I will require the life of man.
6 “Whoever sheds man’s blood [unlawfully],
By man (judicial government) shall his blood be shed,
For in the image of God
He made man.
7 “As for you, be fruitful and multiply;
Populate the earth abundantly and multiply in it.”

8 Then God spoke to Noah and to his sons with him, saying, 9 “Now behold, I am establishing My covenant (binding agreement, solemn promise) with you and with your descendants after you 10 and with every living creature that is with you—the birds, the livestock, and the wild animals of the earth along with you, of everything that comes out of the ark—every living creature of the earth. 11 “I will establish My covenant with you: Never again shall all flesh be cut off by the water of a flood, nor shall there ever again be a flood to destroy and ruin the earth.” 12 And God said, “This is the token (visible symbol, memorial) of the [solemn] covenant which I am making between Me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all future generations; 13 I set My rainbow in the clouds, and it shall be a sign of a covenant between Me and the earth. 14 It shall come about, when I bring clouds over the earth, that the rainbow shall be seen in the clouds, 15 and I will [compassionately] remember My covenant, which is between Me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and never again will the water become a flood to destroy all flesh. 16 “When the rainbow is in the clouds and I look at it, I will [solemnly] remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is on the earth.” 17 And God said to Noah, “This [rainbow] is the sign of the covenant (solemn pledge, binding agreement) which I have established between Me and all living things on the earth.”
18 The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were Shem and Ham and Japheth. Ham would become the father of Canaan. 19 These are the three sons of Noah, and from these [men] the whole earth was populated and scattered with inhabitants.
20 And Noah began to farm and cultivate the ground and he planted a vineyard. 21 He drank some of the wine and became drunk, and he was uncovered and lay exposed inside his tent. 22 Ham, the father of Canaan, saw [by accident] the nakedness of his father, and [to his father’s shame] told his two brothers outside. 23 So Shem and Japheth took a robe and put it on both their shoulders, and walked backwards and covered the nakedness of their father; their faces were turned away so that they did not see their father’s nakedness. 24 When Noah awoke from his wine [induced stupor], he knew what his younger son [Ham] had done to him. 25 So he said,
“Cursed be Canaan [the son of Ham];
A servant of servants
He shall be to his brothers.”
26 He also said,
“Blessed be the LORD,
The God of Shem;
And let Canaan be his servant.
27 “May God enlarge [the land of] Japheth,
And let him dwell in the tents of Shem;
And let Canaan be his servant.”
28 Noah lived three hundred and fifty years after the flood. 29 So all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years, and he died.

Genesis 10
Descendants Of Noah

1 These are the records of the generations (descendants) of Shem, Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah; and the sons born to them after the flood:
2 the sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras; 3 the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah; 4 the sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. 5 From these, [the people of] the coastlands of the nations were separated and spread into their lands, every one according to his own language, according to their constituent groups (families), and into their nations:
6 the sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim [from whom descended the Egyptians], Put, and Canaan; 7 the sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca; and the sons of Raamah; Sheba and Dedan. 8 Cush became the father of Nimrod; he became a mighty one on the earth. 9 He was a mighty hunter before the LORD; therefore it is said, “Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before the LORD.” 10 The beginning of his kingdom was Babel and Erech and Accad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar [in Babylonia]. 11 From that land Nimrod went to Assyria, and built Nineveh, and Rehoboth-Ir, and Calah, 12 and [Nimrod built] Resen, which is between Nineveh and Calah; all these [combined to form] the great city [Nineveh]. 13 Mizraim [the ancestor of the Egyptians] became the father of Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim 14 and Pathrusim and Casluhim—from whom came the Philistines—and Caphtorim.
15 Canaan became the father of Sidon, his firstborn, and Heth 16 and the Jebusite and the Amorite and the Girgashite 17 and the Hivite and the Arkite and the Sinite 18 and the Arvadite and the Zemarite and the Hamathite. Afterward the families of the Canaanite were spread abroad. 19 The territory of the Canaanite extended from Sidon as one goes to Gerar, as far as Gaza; and as one goes to Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha. 20 These are the descendants of Ham according to their constituent groups, according to their languages, by their lands, and by their nations.

21 Also to Shem, the father of all the children of Eber [including the Hebrews], the older brother of Japheth, children were born. 22 The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud and Aram; 23 the sons of Aram [ancestor of the Syrians]: Uz, Hul, Gether and Mash. 24 Arpachshad became the father of Shelah; and Shelah became the father of Eber. 25 Two sons were born to Eber; the name of one was Peleg (division), for [the inhabitants of] the earth were divided in his days; and his brother’s name was Joktan. 26 Joktan became the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, 27 and Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, 28 and Obal, Abimael, Sheba, 29 and Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab; all these were the sons of Joktan. 30 Now their territory extended from Mesha as one goes toward Sephar, to the hill country of the east. 31 These are Shem’s descendants according to their constituent groups (families), according to their languages, by their lands, according to their nations.
32 These are the families of the sons of Noah, according to their descendants, by their nations; and from these [people] the nations were separated and spread abroad on the earth after the flood.

Genesis 11
Universal Language, Babel, Confusion

1 Now the whole earth spoke one language and used the same words (vocabulary). 2 And as people journeyed eastward, they found a plain in the land of Shinar and they settled there. 3 They said one to another, “Come, let us make bricks and fire them thoroughly [in a kiln, to harden and strengthen them].” So they used brick for stone [as building material], and they used tar (bitumen, asphalt) for mortar. 4 They said, “Come, let us build a city for ourselves, and a tower whose top will reach into the heavens, and let us make a [famous] name for ourselves, so that we will not be scattered [into separate groups] and be dispersed over the surface of the entire earth [as the LORD instructed].” 5 Now the LORD came down to see the city and the tower which the sons of men had built. 6 And the LORD said, “Behold, they are one [unified] people, and they all have the same language. This is only the beginning of what they will do [in rebellion against Me], and now no evil thing they imagine they can do will be impossible for them. 7 “Come, let Us (Father, Son, Holy Spirit) go down and there confuse and mix up their language, so that they will not understand one another’s speech.” 8 So the LORD scattered them abroad from there over the surface of the entire earth; and they stopped building the city. 9 Therefore the name of the city was Babel—because there the LORD confused the language of the entire earth; and from that place the LORD scattered and dispersed them over the surface of all the earth.
Descendants of Shem 10 These are the records of the generations of Shem [from whom Abraham descended]. Shem was a hundred years old when he became the father of Arpachshad, two years after the flood. 11 And Shem lived five hundred years after Arpachshad was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
12 When Arpachshad had lived thirty-five years, he became the father of Shelah. 13 Arpachshad lived four hundred and three years after Shelah was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
14 When Shelah had lived thirty years, he became the father of Eber. 15 Shelah lived four hundred and three years after Eber was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
16 When Eber had lived thirty-four years, he became the father of Peleg. 17 And Eber lived four hundred and thirty years after Peleg was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
18 When Peleg had lived thirty years, he became the father of Reu. 19 And Peleg lived two hundred and nine years after Reu was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
20 When Reu had lived thirty-two years, he became the father of Serug. 21 And Reu lived two hundred and seven years after Serug was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
22 When Serug had lived thirty years, he became the father of Nahor. 23 And Serug lived two hundred years after Nahor was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
24 When Nahor had lived twenty-nine years, he became the father of Terah. 25 And Nahor lived a hundred and nineteen years after Terah was born, and he had other sons and daughters.
26 After Terah had lived seventy years, he became the father of Abram and Nahor and Haran [his firstborn].
27 Now these are the records of the descendants of Terah. Terah was the father of Abram (Abraham), Nahor, and Haran; and Haran was the father of Lot. 28 Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his birth, in Ur of the Chaldeans. 29 Abram and Nahor took wives for themselves. The name of Abram’s wife was Sarai (later called Sarah), and the name of Nahor’s wife was Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah and Iscah. 30 But Sarai was barren; she did not have a child.
31 Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran, his grandson, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram’s wife; and they went out together to go from Ur of the Chaldeans into the land of Canaan; but when they came to Haran [about five hundred and fifty miles northwest of Ur], they settled there. 32 Terah lived two hundred and five years; and Terah died in Haran.

Genesis 12
Abram Journeys To Egypt

1 Now [in Haran] the LORD had said to Abram,
“Go away from your country,
And from your relatives
And from your father’s house,
To the land which I will show you;
2 And I will make you a great nation,
And I will bless you [abundantly],
And make your name great (exalted, distinguished);
And you shall be a blessing [a source of great good to others];
3 And I will bless (do good for, benefit) those who bless you,
And I will curse [that is, subject to My wrath and judgment] the one who curses (despises, dishonors, has contempt for) you.
And in you all the families (nations) of the earth will be blessed.”
4 So Abram departed [in faithful obedience] as the LORD had directed him; and Lot [his nephew] left with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he left Haran. 5 Abram took Sarai his wife and Lot his nephew, and all their possessions which they had acquired, and the people (servants) which they had acquired in Haran, and they set out to go to the land of Canaan. When they came to the land of Canaan, 6 Abram passed through the land as far as the site of Shechem, to the [great] terebinth (oak) tree of Moreh. Now the Canaanites were in the land at that time. 7 Then the LORD appeared to Abram and said, “I will give this land to your descendants.” So Abram built an altar there to [honor] the LORD who had appeared to him. 8 Then he moved on from there to the mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, with Bethel on the west and Ai on the east; and there he built an altar to the LORD and called on the name of the LORD [in worship through prayer, praise, and thanksgiving]. 9 Then Abram journeyed on, continuing toward the Negev (the South country of Judah).

10 Now there was a famine in the land; and Abram went down into Egypt to live temporarily, for the famine in the land was oppressive and severe. 11 And when he was about to enter Egypt, he said to Sarai his wife, “Listen: I know that you are a beautiful woman; 12 so when the Egyptians see you, they will say, ‘This is his wife’; and they will kill me [to acquire you], but they will let you live. 13 “Please tell them that you are my sister so that things will go well for me for your sake, and my life will be spared because of you.” 14 And when Abram entered Egypt, the Egyptians saw that Sarai was very beautiful. 15 Pharaoh’s princes (officials) also saw her and praised her to Pharaoh; and the woman was taken [for the purpose of marriage] into Pharaoh’s house (harem). 16 Therefore Pharaoh treated Abram well for her sake; he acquired sheep, oxen, male and female donkeys, male and female servants, and camels.
17 But the LORD punished Pharaoh and his household with severe plagues because of Sarai, Abram’s wife. 18 Then Pharaoh called Abram and said, “What is this that you have done to me? Why did you not tell me that she was your wife? 19 “Why did you say, ‘She is my sister,’ so that I took her as my wife? Now then, here is your wife; take her and go!” 20 So Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him; and they escorted him on his way, with his wife and all that he had.

Genesis 13
Abram And Lot

1 So Abram went up out of Egypt, he and his wife and all that he had, and Lot [his nephew] with him, into the Negev (the South country of Judah).
2 Now Abram was extremely rich in livestock and in silver and in gold. 3 He journeyed on from the Negev as far as Bethel, to the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai, 4 where he had first built an altar; and there Abram called on the name of the LORD [in prayer]. 5 But Lot, who went with Abram, also had flocks and herds and tents. 6 Now the land was not able to support them [that is, sustain all their grazing and water needs] while they lived near one another, for their possessions were too great for them to stay together. 7 And there was strife and quarreling between the herdsmen of Abram’s cattle and the herdsmen of Lot’s cattle. Now the Canaanite and the Perizzite were living in the land at that same time [making grazing of the livestock difficult].
8 So Abram said to Lot, “Please let there be no strife and disagreement between you and me, nor between your herdsmen and my herdsmen, because we are relatives. 9 “Is not the entire land before you? Please separate [yourself] from me. If you take the left, then I will go to the right; or if you choose the right, then I will go to the left.” 10 So Lot looked and saw that the valley of the Jordan was well watered everywhere—this was before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah; [it was all] like the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as you go to Zoar [at the south end of the Dead Sea]. 11 Then Lot chose for himself all the valley of the Jordan, and he traveled east. So they separated from each other. 12 Abram settled in the land of Canaan, and Lot settled in the cities of the valley and camped as far as Sodom and lived there. 13 But the men of Sodom were extremely wicked and sinful against the LORD [unashamed in their open sin before Him].
14 The LORD said to Abram, after Lot had left him, “Now lift up your eyes and look from the place where you are standing, northward and southward and eastward and westward; 15 for all the land which you see I will give to you and to your descendants forever. 16 I will make your descendants [as numerous] as the dust of the earth, so that if a man could count the [grains of] dust of the earth, then your descendants could also be counted. 17 “Arise, walk (make a thorough reconnaissance) around in the land, through its length and its width, for I will give it to you.” 18 Then Abram broke camp and moved his tent, and came and settled by the [grove of the great] terebinths (oak trees) of Mamre [the Amorite], which are in Hebron, and there he built an altar to [honor] the LORD.

Genesis 14
War Of The Kings

1 In the days of the [Eastern] kings Amraphel of Shinar, Arioch of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer of Elam, and Tidal of Goiim, 2 they [invaded the Jordan Valley near the Dead Sea, and] made war with Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar). 3 All of these [kings] joined together [as allies] in the Valley of Siddim (that is, the Sea of Salt). 4 Twelve years they had served Chedorlaomer [the most powerful king in the invading confederacy], but in the thirteenth year they rebelled. 5 In the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer and the [three] kings who were with him attacked and subdued the Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim, 6 and the Horites in their mountainous country of Seir, as far as El-paran, which is on the border of the wilderness. 7 Then they turned back and came to En-mishpat (that is, Kadesh), and subdued all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites who lived in Hazazon-tamar. 8 Then the kings of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboiim, and Bela (that is, Zoar) came out; and they joined together for battle with the invading kings in the Valley of Siddim, 9 gainst Chedorlaomer king of Elam and Tidal king of Goiim and Amraphel king of Shinar and Arioch king of Ellasar—four kings against five. 10 Now the Valley of Siddim was full of tar (bitumen) pits; and as the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, they fell into them. But the remainder [of the kings] who survived fled to the hill country. 11 Then the victors took all the possessions of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their food supply and provisions and left. 12 And they also took [captive] Lot, Abram’s nephew, and his possessions and left, for he was living in Sodom.
13 Then a survivor who had escaped [from the invading forces on the other side of the Jordan] came and told Abram the Hebrew. Now he was living by the terebinths (oaks) of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol and brother of Aner—they were allies of Abram. 14 When Abram heard that his nephew [Lot] had been captured, he armed and led out his trained men, born in his own house, [numbering] three hundred and eighteen, and went in pursuit as far [north] as Dan. 15 He divided his forces against them by night, he and his servants, and attacked and defeated them, and pursued them as far as Hobah, which is north of Damascus. 16 And he brought back all the goods, and also brought back his nephew Lot and his possessions, and also the women, and the people.
Abram and Melchizedek 17 Then after Abram’s return from the defeat (slaughter) of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet him at the Valley of Shaveh (that is, the King’s Valley). 18 Melchizedek king of Salem (ancient Jerusalem) brought out bread and wine [for them]; he was the priest of God Most High. 19 And Melchizedek blessed Abram and said,
“Blessed (joyful, favored) be Abram by God Most High,
Creator and Possessor of heaven and earth;
20 And blessed, praised, and glorified be God Most High,
Who has given your enemies into your hand.”
And Abram gave him a tenth of all [the treasure he had taken in battle]. 21 The king of Sodom said to Abram, “Give me the people and keep the goods (spoils of battle) for yourself.” 22 But Abram said to the king of Sodom, “I have raised my hand and sworn an oath to the LORD God Most High, the Creator and Possessor of heaven and earth, 23 that I would not take anything that is yours, from a thread to a sandal strap, so you could not say, ‘I [the King of Sodom] have made Abram rich.’ 24 “I will take nothing except what my young men have eaten, and the share of the spoils belonging to the men [my allies] who went with me—Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their share of the spoils.”

Genesis 15
Abram Promised A Son

1 After these things the word of the LORD came to Abram in a vision, saying,
“Do not be afraid, Abram,
I am your shield;
Your reward [for obedience] shall be very great.”
2 Abram said, “Lord GOD, what reward will You give me, since I am [leaving this world] childless, and he who will be the owner and heir of my house is this [servant] Eliezer from Damascus?” 3 And Abram continued, “Since You have given no child to me, one (a servant) born in my house is my heir.” 4 Then behold, the word of the LORD came to him, saying, “This man [Eliezer] will not be your heir but he who shall come from your own body shall be your heir.” 5 And the LORD brought Abram outside [his tent into the night] and said, “Look now toward the heavens and count the stars—if you are able to count them.” Then He said to him, “So [numerous] shall your descendants be.” 6 Then Abram believed in (affirmed, trusted in, relied on, remained steadfast to) the LORD; and He counted (credited) it to him as righteousness (doing right in regard to God and man). 7 And He said to him, “I am the [same] LORD who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans, to give you this land as an inheritance.” 8 But Abram said, “Lord GOD, by what [proof] will I know that I will inherit it?” 9 So God said to him, “Bring Me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old female goat, a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.” 10 So Abram brought all these to Him and cut them down the middle, and laid each half opposite the other; but he did not cut the birds. 11 The birds of prey swooped down on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away.
12 When the sun was setting, a deep sleep overcame Abram; and a horror (terror, shuddering fear, nightmare) of great darkness overcame him. 13 God said to Abram, “Know for sure that your descendants will be strangers [living temporarily] in a land (Egypt) that is not theirs, where they will be enslaved and oppressed for four hundred years. 14 But on that nation whom your descendants will serve I will bring judgment, and afterward they will come out [of that land] with great possessions. 15 As for you, you shall [die and] go to your fathers in peace; you shall be buried at a good old age. 16 “Then in the fourth generation your descendants shall return here [to Canaan, the land of promise], for the wickedness and guilt of the Amorites is not yet complete (finished).”
17 When the sun had gone down and a [deep] darkness had come, there appeared a smoking brazier and a flaming torch which passed between the [divided] pieces [of the animals]. 18 On the same day the LORD made a covenant (promise, pledge) with Abram, saying,
“To your descendants I have given this land,
From the river of Egypt to the great river Euphrates—
19 [the land of] the Kenites and the Kenizzites and the Kadmonites 20 and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the Rephaim, 21 the Amorites and the Canaanites and the Girgashites and the Jebusites.”

Genesis 16
Sarai And Hagar

1 Now Sarai, Abram’s wife, had not borne him any children, and she had an Egyptian maid whose name was Hagar. 2 So Sarai said to Abram, “See here, the LORD has prevented me from bearing children. I am asking you to go in to [the bed of] my maid [so that she may bear you a child]; perhaps I will obtain children by her.” And Abram listened to Sarai and did as she said. 3 After Abram had lived in the land of Canaan ten years, Abram’s wife Sarai took Hagar the Egyptian [maid], and gave her to her husband Abram to be his [secondary] wife. 4 He went in to [the bed of] Hagar, and she conceived; and when she realized that she had conceived, she looked with contempt on her mistress [regarding Sarai as insignificant because of her infertility]. 5 Then Sarai said to Abram, “May [the responsibility for] the wrong done to me [by the arrogant behavior of Hagar] be upon you. I gave my maid into your arms, and when she realized that she had conceived, I was despised and looked on with disrespect. May the LORD judge [who has done right] between you and me.” 6 But Abram said to Sarai, “Look, your maid is entirely in your hands and subject to your authority; do as you please with her.” So Sarai treated her harshly and humiliated her, and Hagar fled from her.
7 But the Angel of the LORD found her by a spring of water in the wilderness, on the road to [Egypt by way of] Shur. 8 And He said, “Hagar, Sarai’s maid, where did you come from and where are you going?” And she said, “I am running away from my mistress Sarai.” 9 The Angel of the LORD said to her, “Go back to your mistress, and submit humbly to her authority.” 10 Then the Angel of the LORD said to her, “I will greatly multiply your descendants so that they will be too many to count.” 11 The Angel of the LORD continued,
“Behold, you are with child,
And you will bear a son;
And you shall name him Ishmael (God hears),
Because the LORD has heard and paid attention to your persecution (suffering).
12 “He (Ishmael) will be a wild donkey of a man;
His hand will be against every man [continually fighting]
And every man’s hand against him;
And he will dwell in defiance of all his brothers.”
13 Then she called the name of the LORD who spoke to her, “You are God Who Sees”; for she said, “Have I not even here [in the wilderness] remained alive after seeing Him [who sees me with understanding and compassion]?” 14 Therefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi (Well of the Living One Who Sees Me); it is between Kadesh and Bered.
15 So Hagar gave birth to Abram’s son; and Abram named his son, to whom Hagar gave birth, Ishmael (God hears). 16 Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar gave birth to Ishmael.

Genesis 17
Abraham And The Covenant Of Circumcision

1 When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the LORD appeared to him and said,
“I am God Almighty;
Walk [habitually] before Me [with integrity, knowing that you are always in My presence], and be blameless and complete [in obedience to Me].
2 “I will establish My covenant (everlasting promise) between Me and you,
And I will multiply you exceedingly [through your descendants].”
3 Then Abram fell on his face [in worship], and God spoke with him, saying,
4 “As for Me, behold, My covenant is with you,
And [as a result] you shall be the father of many nations.
5 “No longer shall your name be Abram (exalted father),
But your name shall be Abraham (father of a multitude);
For I will make you the father of many nations.

6 I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I will make nations of you, and kings will come from you. 7 I will establish My covenant between Me and you and your descendants after you throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your descendants after you. 8 “I will give to you and to your descendants after you the land in which you are a stranger [moving from place to place], all the land of Canaan, as an everlasting possession [of property]; and I will be their God.”
9 Further, God said to Abraham, “As for you [your part of the agreement], you shall keep and faithfully obey [the terms of] My covenant, you and your descendants after you throughout their generations. 10 This is [the sign of] My covenant, which you shall keep and faithfully obey, between Me and you and your descendants after you: Every male among you shall be circumcised. 11 And you shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskins, and it shall be the sign (symbol, memorial) of the covenant between Me and you. 12 Every male among you who is eight days old shall be circumcised throughout your generations, [including] a servant whether born in the house or one who is purchased with [your] money from any foreigner, who is not of your descendants. 13 A servant who is born in your house or one who is purchased with your money must be circumcised; and [the sign of] My covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant. 14 “And the male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that person shall be cut off from his people; he has broken My covenant.”
15 Then God said to Abraham, “As for Sarai your wife, you shall not call her name Sarai (my princess), but her name will be Sarah (Princess). 16 “I will bless her, and indeed I will also give you a son by her. Yes, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of peoples will come from her.” 17 Then Abraham fell on his face and laughed, and said in his heart, “Shall a child be born to a man who is a hundred years old? And shall Sarah, who is ninety years old, bear a child?” 18 And Abraham said to God, “Oh, that Ishmael [my firstborn] might live before You!” 19 But God said, “No, Sarah your wife shall bear you a son indeed, and you shall name him Isaac (laughter); and I will establish My covenant with him for an everlasting covenant and with his descendants after him. 20 As for Ishmael, I have heard and listened to you; behold, I will bless him, and will make him fruitful and will greatly multiply him [through his descendants]. He will be the father of twelve princes (chieftains, sheiks), and I will make him a great nation. 21 “But My covenant [My promise, My solemn pledge], I will establish with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this time next year.” 22 And God finished speaking with him and went up from Abraham.
23 Then Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all the servants who were born in his house and all who were purchased with his money, every male among the men of Abraham’s household, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin the very same day, as God had said to him. 24 So Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised. 25 And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was circumcised. 26 On the very same day Abraham was circumcised, as well as Ishmael his son. 27 All the men [servants] of his household, both those born in the house and those purchased with money from a foreigner, were circumcised along with him [as the sign of God’s covenant with Abraham].

Genesis 18
Birth Of Isaac Promised

1 Now the LORD appeared to Abraham by the terebinth trees of Mamre [in Hebron], while he was sitting at the tent door in the heat of the day. 2 When he raised his eyes and looked up, behold, three men were standing [a little distance] from him. When he saw them, he ran from the tent door to meet them and bowed down [with his face] to the ground, 3 and Abraham said, “My lord, if now I have found favor in your sight, please do not pass by your servant [without stopping to visit]. 4 Please let a little water be brought [by one of my servants] and [you may] wash your feet, and recline and rest comfortably under the tree. 5 And I will bring a piece of bread to refresh and sustain you; after that you may go on, since you have come to your servant.” And they replied, “Do as you have said.” 6 So Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah, and said, “Quickly, get ready three measures of fine meal, knead it and bake cakes.” 7 Abraham also ran to the herd and brought a calf, tender and choice, and he gave it to the servant [to butcher], and he hurried to prepare it. 8 Then he took curds and milk and the calf which he had prepared, and set it before the men; and he stood beside them under the tree while they ate.
9 Then they said to him, “Where is Sarah your wife?” And he said, “There, in the tent.” 10 He said, “I will surely return to you at this time next year; and behold, Sarah your wife will have a son.” And Sarah was listening at the tent door, which was behind him. 11 Now Abraham and Sarah were old, well advanced in years; she was past [the age of] childbearing. 12 So Sarah laughed to herself [when she heard the LORD’S words], saying, “After I have become old, shall I have pleasure and delight, my lord (husband) being also old?” 13 And the LORD asked Abraham, “Why did Sarah laugh [to herself], saying, ‘Shall I really give birth [to a child] when I am so old?’ 14 “Is anything too difficult or too wonderful for the LORD? At the appointed time, when the season [for her delivery] comes, I will return to you and Sarah will have a son.” 15 Then Sarah denied it, saying, “I did not laugh”; because she was afraid. And He (the LORD) said, “No, but you did laugh.”

16 Then the men got up from there, and looked toward Sodom; and Abraham walked with them to send them on the way. 17 The LORD said, “Shall I keep secret from Abraham [My friend and servant] what I am going to do, 18 since Abraham is destined to become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth will be blessed through him? 19 “For I have known (chosen, acknowledged) him [as My own], so that he may teach and command his children and [the sons of] his household after him to keep the way of the LORD by doing what is righteous and just, so that the LORD may bring upon Abraham what He has promised him.” 20 And the LORD said, “The outcry [of the sin] of Sodom and Gomorrah is indeed great, and their sin is exceedingly grave. 21 “I will go down now, and see whether they have acted [as vilely and wickedly] as the outcry which has come to Me [indicates]; and if not, I will know.”
22 Now the [two] men (angelic beings) turned away from there and went toward Sodom, but Abraham remained standing before the LORD. 23 Abraham approached [the LORD] and said, “Will You really sweep away the righteous (those who do right) with the wicked (those who do evil)? 24 Suppose there are fifty righteous [people] within the city; will You really sweep it away and not spare it for the sake of the fifty righteous who are in it? 25 “Far be it from You to do such a thing—to strike the righteous with the wicked, so that the righteous and the wicked are treated alike. Far be it from You! Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right [by executing just and righteous judgment]?” 26 So the LORD said, “If I find within the city of Sodom fifty righteous [people], then I will spare the entire place for their sake.” 27 Abraham answered, “Now behold, I who am but dust [in origin] and ashes have decided to speak to the Lord. 28 “If five of the fifty righteous are lacking, will You destroy the entire city for lack of five?” And He said, “If I find [at least] forty-five [righteous people] there, I will not destroy it.” 29 Abraham spoke to Him yet again and said, “Suppose [only] forty are found there.” And He said, “I will not do it for the sake of the forty [who are righteous].” 30 Then Abraham said [to Him], “Oh, may the Lord not be angry, and I will speak; suppose thirty [righteous people] are found there?” And He said, “I will not do it if I find thirty there.” 31 And he said, “Now behold, I have decided to speak to the Lord [again]. Suppose [only] twenty [righteous people] are found there?” And the Lord said, “I will not destroy it for the sake of the twenty.” 32 Then Abraham said, “Oh may the Lord not be angry [with me], and I will speak only this once; suppose ten [righteous people] are found there?” And He said, “I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten.” 33 As soon as He had finished speaking with Abraham the LORD departed, and Abraham returned to his own place.

Genesis 19
The Doom Of Sodom

1 It was evening when the two angels came to Sodom. Lot was sitting at Sodom’s [city] gate. Seeing them, Lot got up to meet them and bowed down with his face to the ground. 2 And he said, “See here, my lords, please turn aside and come into your servant’s house, and spend the night, and wash your feet; then you may get up early and go on your way.” But they said, “No, we shall spend the night in the open plaza [of the city].” 3 However, Lot strongly urged them, so they turned aside and entered his house; and he prepared a feast for them [with wine], and baked unleavened bread, and they ate. 4 But before they lay down [to sleep], the men of the city, the men of Sodom, both young and old, surrounded the house, all the men from every quarter; 5 and they called out to Lot and said to him, “Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we may know them [intimately].” 6 But Lot went out of the doorway to the men, and shut the door after him, 7 and said, “Please, my brothers, do not do something so wicked. 8 “See here, I have two daughters who have not known a man [intimately]; please let me bring them out to you [instead], and you can do as you please with them; only do nothing to these men, because they have in fact come under the shelter of my roof [for protection].” 9 But they said, “Get out of the way!” And they said, “This man (Lot) came [as an outsider] to live here temporarily, and now he is acting like a judge. Now we will treat you worse than your visitors!” So they rushed forward and pressed violently against Lot and came close to breaking down the door [of his house]. 10 But the men (angels) reached out with their hands and pulled Lot into the house with them, and shut the door [after him]. 11 They struck (punished) the men who were at the doorway of the house with blindness, from the young men to the old men, so that they exhausted themselves trying to find the doorway.
12 And the [two] men (angels) asked Lot, “Have you any others here [in Sodom]—a son-in-law, and your sons, and your daughters? Whomever you have in the city, take them out of here; 13 for we are destroying this place, because the outcry [for judgment] against them has grown so great before the LORD that the LORD has sent us to destroy and ruin it.” 14 So Lot went out and spoke to his sons-in-law, who were [betrothed, and legally promised] to marry his daughters, and said, “Get up, get out of this place, for the LORD is about to destroy this city!” But to his sons-in-law he appeared to be joking.
15 When morning dawned, the angels urged Lot [to hurry], saying, “Get up! Take your wife and two daughters who are here [and go], or you will be swept away in the punishment of the city.” 16 But Lot hesitated and lingered. The men took hold of his hand and the hand of his wife and the hands of his two daughters, because the LORD was merciful to him [for Abraham’s sake]; and they brought him out, and left him outside the city [with his family]. 17 When they had brought them outside, one [of the angels] said, “Escape for your life! Do not look behind you, or stop anywhere in the entire valley; escape to the mountains [of Moab], or you will be consumed and swept away.” 18 But Lot said to them, “Oh no, [not that place] my lords! 19 Please listen, your servant has found favor in your sight, and you have magnified your lovingkindness (mercy) to me by saving my life; but I cannot escape to the mountains, because the disaster will overtake me and I will be killed. 20 “Now look, this town [in the distance] is near enough for us to flee to, and it is small [with only a few people]. Please, let me escape there (is it not small?) so that my life will be saved.” 21 And the angel said to him, “Behold, I grant you this request also; I will not destroy this town of which you have spoken. 22 “Hurry and take refuge there, for I cannot do anything [to punish Sodom] until you arrive there.” For this reason the town was named Zoar (few, small).

23 The sun had risen over the earth when Lot came to Zoar. 24 Then the LORD rained down brimstone (flaming sulfur) and fire on Sodom and on Gomorrah from the LORD out of heaven, 25 and He overthrew (demolished, ended) those cities, and the entire valley, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and whatever grew on the ground. 26 But Lot’s wife, from behind him, [foolishly, longingly] looked [back toward Sodom in an act of disobedience], and she became a pillar of salt.
27 Abraham started out early the next morning to the place where he [only the day before] had stood before the LORD; 28 and he looked down toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the valley [of the Dead Sea]; and he saw, and behold, the smoke of the land went up like the smoke of a kiln (pottery furnace).
29 Now when God ravaged and destroyed the cities of the plain [of Siddim], He remembered Abraham [and for that reason], and He sent [Abraham’s nephew] Lot out of the midst of the destruction, when He destroyed the cities in which Lot had lived.
Lot Is Debased 30 Now Lot went up from Zoar, and lived in the mountain together with his two daughters, for he was afraid to stay [any longer] in Zoar; and he lived in a cave with his two daughters. 31 The firstborn said to the younger, “Our father is aging, and there is not a man on earth [available] to be intimate with us in the customary way [so that we may have children]. 32 “Come, let us make our father drunk with wine, and we will lie with him so that we may preserve our family through our father.” 33 So they gave their father wine that night, and the firstborn went in and lay with her father; and he did not know when she lay down or when she got up [because he was completely intoxicated]. 34 Then the next day, the firstborn said to the younger, “Behold, I lay with my father last night; let us make him drunk with wine tonight also, and then you go in and lie with him, so that we may preserve our family through our father.” 35 So they gave their father wine that night also, and the younger got up and lay with him; and again he did not know when she lay down or when she got up. 36 Thus both the daughters of Lot conceived by their father. 37 The firstborn gave birth to a son, and named him Moab (from father); he is the father of the Moabites to this day. 38 The younger also gave birth to a son and named him Ben-ammi (son of my people); he is the father of the Ammonites to this day.

Genesis 20
Abraham’s Deception

1 Now Abraham journeyed from there toward the Negev (the South country), and settled between Kadesh and Shur; then he lived temporarily in Gerar. 2 Abraham said [again] of Sarah his wife, “She is my sister.” So Abimelech king of Gerar sent and took Sarah [into his harem]. 3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream during the night, and said, “Behold, you are a dead man because of the woman whom you have taken [as your wife], for she is another man’s wife.” 4 Now Abimelech had not yet come near her; so he said, “Lord, will you kill a people who are righteous and innocent and blameless [regarding Sarah]? 5 “Did Abraham not tell me, ‘She is my sister?’ And she herself said, ‘He is my brother.’ In the integrity of my heart and innocence of my hands I have done this.” 6 Then God said to him in the dream, “Yes, I know you did this in the integrity of your heart, for it was I who kept you back and spared you from sinning against Me; therefore I did not give you an opportunity to touch her. 7 “So now return the man’s wife, for he is a prophet, and he will pray for you and you will live. But if you do not return her [to him], know that you shall die, you and all who are yours (your household).”
8 So Abimelech got up early in the morning and called all his servants and told them all these things; and the men were terrified. 9 Then Abimelech called Abraham and said to him, “What have you done to us? And how have I offended you that you have brought on me and my kingdom a great sin? You have done to me what ought not to be done [to anyone].” 10 And Abimelech said to Abraham, “What have you encountered or seen [in us or our customs], that you have done this [unjust] thing?” 11 Abraham said, “Because I thought, ‘Surely there is no fear or reverence of God in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife.’ 12 Besides, she actually is my [half] sister; she is the daughter of my father [Terah], but not of my mother; and she became my wife. 13 “When God caused me to wander from my father’s house, I said to her, ‘This kindness and loyalty you can show me: at every place we stop, say of me, “He is my brother.”’” 14 Then Abimelech took sheep and oxen and male and female slaves, and gave them to Abraham, and returned Sarah his wife to him [as God commanded]. 15 So Abimelech said, “Behold, my land is before you; settle wherever you please.” 16 Then to Sarah he said, “Look, I have given this brother of yours a thousand pieces of silver; it is to compensate you [for all that has happened] and to vindicate your honor before all who are with you; before all men you are cleared and compensated.” 17 So Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife and his maids, and they again gave birth to children, 18 for the LORD had securely closed the wombs of all [the women] in Abimelech’s household because of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.

Genesis 21
Isaac Is Born

1 The LORD graciously remembered and visited Sarah as He had said, and the LORD did for her as He had promised. 2 So Sarah conceived and gave birth to a son for Abraham in his old age, at the appointed time of which God had spoken to him. 3 Abraham named his son Isaac (laughter), the son to whom Sarah gave birth. 4 So Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, just as God had commanded him. 5 Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born. 6 Sarah said, “God has made me laugh; all who hear [about our good news] will laugh with me.” 7 And she said, “Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? For I have given birth to a son by him in his old age.”
8 The child [Isaac] grew and was weaned, and Abraham held a great feast on the day that Isaac was weaned. Sarah Turns against Hagar 9 Now [as time went on] Sarah saw [Ishmael] the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, mocking [Isaac]. 10 Therefore she said to Abraham, “Drive out this maid and her son, for the son of this maid shall not be an heir with my son Isaac.” 11 The situation distressed Abraham greatly because of his son [Ishmael]. 12 God said to Abraham, “Do not let it distress you because of Ishmael and your maid; whatever Sarah tells you, listen to her and do what she asks, for your descendants will be named through Isaac. 13 “And I will also make a nation of [Ishmael] the son of the maid, because he is your descendant.” 14 So Abraham got up early in the morning and took bread and a skin of water and gave them to Hagar, putting them on her shoulder, and gave her the boy, and sent her away. And she left [but lost her way] and wandered [aimlessly] in the Wilderness of Beersheba.
15 When the water in the skin was all gone, Hagar abandoned the boy under one of the bushes. 16 Then she went and sat down opposite him, about a bowshot away, for she said, “Do not let me see the boy die.” And as she sat down opposite him, she raised her voice and wept. 17 God heard the voice of the boy, and the angel of God called to Hagar from heaven and said to her, “What troubles you, Hagar? Do not be afraid, for God has heard the voice of the boy from where he is [resting]. 18 “Get up, help the boy up, and hold him by the hand, for I will make him a great nation.” 19 Then God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water; and she went and filled the [empty] skin with water and gave the boy a drink.
20 God was with Ishmael, and he grew and developed; and he lived in the wilderness and became an [expert] archer. 21 He lived in the wilderness of Paran; and his mother took a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
Covenant with Abimelech 22 Now at that time Abimelech and Phicol, the commander of his army, said to Abraham, “God is with you in everything you do; 23 so now, swear to me here by God that you will not deal unfairly with me [by breaking any agreements we have] or with my son or with my descendants, but as I have treated you with kindness, you shall do the same to me and to the land in which you have sojourned (temporarily lived).” 24 And Abraham said, “I will swear.” 25 Then Abraham complained to Abimelech about a well of water which the servants of Abimelech had [violently] seized [from him], 26 Abimelech said, “I do not know who did this thing. Indeed, you did not tell me, and I did not hear of it until today.”
27 So Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them to Abimelech, and the two men made a covenant (binding agreement). 28 Then Abraham set apart seven ewe lambs of the flock, 29 and Abimelech said to Abraham, “What is the meaning of these seven ewe lambs which you have set apart?” 30 Abraham said, “You are to accept these seven ewe lambs from me as a witness for me, that I dug this well.” 31 Therefore that place was called Beersheba (Well of the Oath or Well of the Seven), because there the two of them swore an oath. 32 So they made a covenant at Beersheba; then Abimelech and Phicol, the commander of his army, got up and returned to the land of the Philistines. 33 Abraham planted a tamarisk tree at Beersheba, and there he called on the name of the LORD [in prayer], the Eternal God. 34 And Abraham lived [as a resident alien] in the land of the Philistines for many days.

Genesis 22
The Offering Of Isaac

1 Now after these things, God tested [the faith and commitment of] Abraham and said to him, “Abraham!” And he answered, “Here I am.” 2 God said, “Take now your son, your only son [of promise], whom you love, Isaac, and go to the region of Moriah, and offer him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains of which I shall tell you.” 3 So Abraham got up early in the morning, saddled his donkey, and took two of his young men with him and his son Isaac; and he split the wood for the burnt offering, and then he got up and went to the place of which God had told him. 4 On the third day [of travel] Abraham looked up and saw the place in the distance. 5 Abraham said to his servants, “Settle down and stay here with the donkey; the young man and I will go over there and worship [God], and we will come back to you.” 6 Then Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and laid it on [the shoulders of] Isaac his son, and he took the fire (firepot) in his own hand and the [sacrificial] knife; and the two of them walked on together. 7 And Isaac said to Abraham, “My father!” And he said, “Here I am, my son.” Isaac said, “Look, the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for the burnt offering?” 8 Abraham said, “My son, God will provide for Himself a lamb for the burnt offering.” So the two walked on together.
9 When they came to the place of which God had told him, Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood, and bound Isaac his son and placed him on the altar, on top of the wood. 10 Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to kill his son. 11 But the Angel of the LORD called to him from heaven and said, “Abraham, Abraham!” He answered, “Here I am.” 12 The LORD said, “Do not reach out [with the knife in] your hand against the boy, and do nothing to [harm] him; for now I know that you fear God [with reverence and profound respect], since you have not withheld from Me your son, your only son [of promise].” 13 Then Abraham looked up and glanced around, and behold, behind him was a ram caught in a thicket by his horns. And Abraham went and took the ram and offered it up for a burnt offering (ascending sacrifice) instead of his son. 14 So Abraham named that place The LORD Will Provide. And it is said to this day, “On the mountain of the LORD it will be seen and provided.”

15 The Angel of the LORD called to Abraham from heaven a second time 16 and said, “By Myself (on the basis of Who I Am) I have sworn [an oath], declares the LORD, that since you have done this thing and have not withheld [from Me] your son, your only son [of promise], 17 indeed I will greatly bless you, and I will greatly multiply your descendants like the stars of the heavens and like the sand on the seashore; and your seed shall possess the gate of their enemies [as conquerors]. 18 “Through your seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, because you have heard and obeyed My voice.” 19 So Abraham returned to his servants, and they got up and went with him to Beersheba; and Abraham settled in Beersheba.
20 Now after these things Abraham was told, “Milcah has borne children to your brother Nahor: 21 Uz the firstborn and Buz his brother and Kemuel the father of Aram, 22 Chesed and Hazo and Pildash and Jidlaph and Bethuel.” 23 Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. These eight [children] Milcah bore to Nahor, Abraham’s brother. 24 Nahor’s concubine, whose name was Reumah, gave birth to Tebah and Gaham and Tahash and Maacah.

Genesis 23
Death And Burial Of Sarah

1 Sarah lived a hundred and twenty-seven years; this was the length of the life of Sarah. 2 Sarah died in Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan, and Abraham went to mourn for Sarah and to weep for her. 3 Then Abraham stood up before his dead [wife’s body], and spoke to the sons of Heth (Hittites), saying, 4 “I am a stranger and a sojourner (resident alien) among you; give (sell) me property for a burial place among you so that I may bury my dead [in the proper manner].” 5 The Hittites replied to Abraham, 6 “Listen to us, my lord; you are a prince of God [a mighty prince] among us; bury your dead in the choicest of our graves; none of us will refuse you his grave or hinder you from burying your dead [wife].” 7 So Abraham stood up and bowed to the people of the land, the Hittites. 8 And Abraham said to them, “If you are willing to grant my dead a [proper] burial, listen to me, and plead with Ephron the son of Zohar for me, 9 so that he may give (sell) me the cave of Machpelah which he owns—it is at the end of his field; let him give it to me here in your presence for the full price as a burial site [which I may keep forever among you].” 10 Now Ephron was present there among the sons of Heth; so within the hearing of all the sons of Heth and all who were entering the gate of his city, Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham, saying, 11 “No, my lord, hear me; I give you the [entire] field, and I also give you the cave that is in it. In the presence of the men of my people I give (sell) it to you; bury your dead [there].” 12 Then Abraham bowed down before the people of the land. 13 He said to Ephron in the presence of the people of the land, “If you will only please listen to me and accept my offer. I will give you the price of the field; accept it from me and I will bury my dead there.” 14 Ephron replied to Abraham, 15 “My lord, listen to me. The land [you seek] is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that between you and me? So bury your dead.” 16 So Abraham listened to Ephron [and agreed to his terms]; and he weighed out for Ephron the [amount of] silver which he had named in the hearing of the Hittites: four hundred shekels of silver, according to the weights current among the merchants.
17 So the field of Ephron in Machpelah, which was to the east of Mamre (Hebron)—the field and the cave which was in it, and all the trees that were in the field and in all its borders around it—were deeded over [legally] 18 to Abraham as his possession in the presence of the Hittites, before all who were entering at the gate of his city. 19 After this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah to the east of Mamre (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan. 20 The field and the cave in it were deeded over to Abraham by the Hittites as a [permanent] possession and burial place.

Genesis 24
A Bride For Isaac

1 Now Abraham was old, [well] advanced in age; and the LORD had blessed Abraham in all things. 2 Abraham said to his servant [Eliezer of Damascus], the oldest of his household, who had charge over all that Abraham owned, “Please, put your hand under my thigh [as is customary for affirming a solemn oath], 3 and I will make you swear by the LORD, the God of heaven and the God of earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I live, 4 but you will [instead] go to my [former] country (Mesopotamia) and to my relatives, and take a wife for my son Isaac [the heir of the covenant promise].” 5 The servant said to him, “Suppose the woman will not be willing to follow me back to this country; should I take your son back to the country from which you came?” 6 Abraham said to him, “See to it that you do not take my son back there! 7 The LORD, the God of heaven, who took me from my father’s house, from the land of my family and my birth, who spoke to me and swore to me, saying, ‘To your descendants I will give this land’—He will send His angel before you [to guide you], and you will take a wife from there for my son [and bring her here]. 8 “If the woman is not willing to follow you [to this land], then you will be free from this my oath and blameless; only you must never take my son back there.” 9 So the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and swore to him concerning this matter.

10 Then the servant took ten of his master’s camels, and set out, taking some of his master’s good things with him; so he got up and journeyed to Mesopotamia [between the Tigris and the Euphrates Rivers], to the city of Nahor [the home of Abraham’s brother]. 11 He made the camels kneel down outside the city by the well of water at the time of the evening when women go out to draw water. 12 And he said, “O LORD, God of my master Abraham, please grant me success today, and show lovingkindness (faithfulness) to my master Abraham. 13 Behold, I stand here at the spring of water, and the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water; 14 now let it be that the girl to whom I say, ‘Please, let down your jar so that I may [have a] drink,’ and she replies, ‘Drink, and I will also give your camels water to drink’—may she be the one whom You have selected [as a wife] for Your servant Isaac; and by this I will know that You have shown lovingkindness (faithfulness) to my master.”
Rebekah Is Chosen 15 Before Eliezer had finished speaking (praying), Rebekah came out with her [water] jar on her shoulder. Rebekah was the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, who was the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor. 16 The girl was very beautiful, a virgin and unmarried; and she went down to the spring and filled her jar and came up. 17 Then the servant ran to meet her, and said, “Please let me drink a little water from your jar.” 18 And she said, “Drink, my lord”; and she quickly lowered her jar to her hand, and gave him a drink. 19 When she had given Eliezer a drink, she said, “I will also draw water for your camels until they have finished drinking.” 20 So she quickly emptied her jar into the trough, and ran again to the well and drew water for all his camels. 21 Meanwhile, the man stood gazing at Rebekah in [reverent] silence, [waiting] to know if the LORD had made his trip successful or not.
22 When the camels had finished drinking, Eliezer took a gold ring weighing a half-shekel and two bracelets for her hands weighing ten shekels in gold, 23 and said, “Whose daughter are you? Please tell me, is there room in your father’s house for us to lodge?” 24 And she said to him, “I am the daughter of Bethuel, Milcah’s son, whom she bore to [her husband] Nahor.” 25 Again she said to him, “We have plenty of both straw and feed, and also room to lodge.” 26 The man bowed his head and worshiped the LORD. 27 He said, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of my master Abraham, who has not denied His lovingkindness and His truth to my master. As for me, the LORD led me to the house of my master’s brothers.”
28 Then the girl ran and told her mother’s household what had happened. 29 Now Rebekah had a brother whose name was Laban; and Laban ran out to the man at the well. 30 When he saw the ring and the bracelets on his sister’s arms, and when he heard Rebekah his sister, saying, “The man said this to me,” he went to Eliezer and found him standing by the camels at the spring. 31 And Laban said, “Come in, blessed of the LORD! Why do you stand outside since I have made the house ready and have prepared a place for the camels?” 32 So the man came into the house, and Laban unloaded his camels and gave them straw and feed, and [he gave] water to [Eliezer to] wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him. 33 But when food was set before him, he said, “I will not eat until I have stated my business.” And Laban said, “Speak on.” 34 So he said, “I am Abraham’s servant. 35 The LORD has greatly blessed my master, and he has become great (wealthy, powerful); He has given him flocks and herds, and silver and gold, and servants and maids, and camels and donkeys. 36 Now Sarah my master’s wife bore a son to my master when she was in her old age, and he has given everything that he has to him. 37 My master made me swear [an oath], saying, ‘You must not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I live; 38 but you shall [instead] go to my father’s house and to my family and take a wife for my son [Isaac].’ 39 Then I said to my master, ‘But suppose the woman will not follow me [back to this land].’ 40 He said to me, ‘The LORD, before whom I walk [habitually and obediently], will send His angel with you to make your journey successful, and you will take a wife for my son from my relatives and from my father’s house; 41 then you will be free of my oath, when you come to my relatives; and if they do not give her to you, you will [also] be free of my oath.’
42 “I came today to the spring, and said, ‘O LORD, God of my master Abraham, if now You will make my journey on which I go successful; 43 please look, I am standing by the spring of water; now let it be that when the maiden [whom You have chosen for Isaac] comes out to draw [water], and to whom I say, “Please, give me a little water to drink from your jar”; 44 and if she says to me, “You drink, and I will also draw [water] for your camels”; let that woman be the one whom the LORD has selected and chosen [as a wife] for my master’s son.’
45 “Before I had finished praying in my heart, behold, Rebekah came out with her [water] jar on her shoulder, and she went down to the spring and drew water. And I said to her, ‘Please, let me have a drink.’ 46 And she quickly let down her jar from her shoulder, and said, ‘Drink, and I will also water your camels’; so I drank, and she also watered the camels. 47 Then I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ She said, ‘The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor’s son, whom Milcah bore to him’; and I put the ring in her nose, and the bracelets on her arms. 48 And I bowed down my head and worshiped the LORD, and blessed the LORD, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right way to take the daughter of my master’s brother to his son [as a wife]. 49 “So now if you are going to show kindness and truth to my master [being faithful to him], tell me; and if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right or to the left [and go on my way].”
50 Then Laban and Bethuel answered, “The matter has come from the LORD; so we dare not speak bad or good [to you about it—we cannot interfere]. 51 “Rebekah is before you; take her and go, and let her be the wife of your master’s son, as the LORD has spoken.”
52 When Abraham’s servant heard their words, he bowed himself to the ground [in worship] before the LORD. 53 Then the servant brought out jewelry of silver, jewelry of gold, and articles of clothing, and gave them to Rebekah; he also gave precious things to her brother and her mother. 54 Then he and the men who were with him ate and drank and spent the night [there]. In the morning when they got up, he said, “Now send me back to my master.” 55 But Rebekah’s brother and mother said, “Let the girl stay with us a few days—at least ten; then she may go.” 56 But Eliezer said to them, “Do not delay me, since the LORD has prospered my way. Send me away, so that I may go back to my master.” 57 And they said, “We will call the girl and ask her what she prefers.” 58 So they called Rebekah and said, “Will you go with this man?” And she answered, “I will go.” 59 So they sent off their sister Rebekah and her nurse [Deborah, as her attendant] and Abraham’s servant [Eliezer] and his men. 60 They blessed Rebekah and said to her,
“May you, our sister,
Become [the mother of] thousands of ten thousands,
And may your descendants possess (conquer)
The [city] gate of those who hate them.”
61 Then Rebekah and her attendants stood, and they mounted camels and followed the man. So the servant took Rebekah and went on his way.
Isaac Marries Rebekah 62 Now Isaac had returned from going to Beer-lahai-roi (Well of the Living One Who Sees Me), for he was living in the Negev. 63 Isaac went out to bow down [in prayer] in the field in the [early] evening; he raised his eyes and looked, and camels were coming. 64 Rebekah also raised her eyes and looked, and when she saw Isaac, she dismounted from her camel. 65 She said to the servant, “Who is that man there walking across the field to meet us?” And the servant said, “He is my master [Isaac].” So she took a veil and covered herself [as was customary]. 66 The servant told Isaac everything that he had done. 67 Then Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah’s tent, and he took Rebekah [in marriage], and she became his wife, and he loved her; therefore Isaac was comforted after his mother’s death.

Genesis 25
Abraham’s Death

1 Abraham took another wife, whose name was Keturah. 2 She gave birth to Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. 3 Jokshan was the father of Sheba and Dedan. The sons of Dedan were Asshurim, Letushim, and Leummim. 4 The sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah. 5 Now Abraham gave everything that he had to Isaac; 6 but to the sons of his concubines [Hagar and Keturah], Abraham gave gifts while he was still living and he sent them to the east country, away from Isaac his son [of promise].
7 The days of Abraham’s life were a hundred and seventy-five years. 8 Then Abraham breathed his last and he died at a good old age, an old man who was satisfied [with life]; and he was gathered to his people [who had preceded him in death]. 9 So his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is east of Mamre, 10 the field which Abraham purchased from the sons of Heth; there Abraham was buried with Sarah his wife. 11 Now after the death of Abraham, God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac lived at Beer-lahai-roi.
Descendants of Ishmael 12 Now these are the records of the descendants of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s maid, bore to Abraham; 13 and these are the names of the [twelve] sons of Ishmael, named in the order of their births: Nebaioth, the firstborn of Ishmael, and Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, 14 Mishma, Dumah, Massa, 15 Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. 16 These are the sons of Ishmael and these are their names, by their settlements, and by their encampments (sheepfolds); twelve princes (sheiks) according to their tribes. 17 Ishmael lived a hundred and thirty-seven years; then he breathed his last and died, and was gathered to his people [who had preceded him in death]. 18 Ishmael’s sons (descendants) settled from Havilah to Shur which is east of Egypt as one goes toward Assyria; he settled opposite (east) of all his relatives.
Isaac’s Sons 19 Now these are the records of the descendants of Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham was the father of Isaac. 20 Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean (Syrian) of Paddan-aram, the sister of Laban the Aramean. 21 Isaac prayed to the LORD for his wife, because she was unable to conceive children; and the LORD granted his prayer and Rebekah his wife conceived [twins]. 22 But the children struggled together within her [kicking and shoving one another]; and she said, “If it is so [that the LORD has heard our prayer], why then am I this way?” So she went to inquire of the LORD [praying for an answer]. 23 The LORD said to her,
“[The founders of] two nations are in your womb;
And the separation of two nations has begun in your body;
The one people shall be stronger than the other;
And the older shall serve the younger.”
24 When her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb. 25 The first came out reddish all over like a hairy garment; and they named him Esau (hairy). 26 Afterward his brother came out, and his hand grasped Esau’s heel, so he was named Jacob (one who grabs by the heel, supplanter). Isaac was sixty years old when Rebekah gave birth to them.
27 When the boys grew up, Esau was an able and skilled hunter, a man of the outdoors, but Jacob was a quiet and peaceful man, living in tents. 28 Now Isaac loved [and favored] Esau, because he enjoyed eating his game, but Rebekah loved [and favored] Jacob. 29 Jacob had cooked [reddish-brown lentil] stew [one day], when Esau came from the field and was famished; 30 and Esau said to Jacob, “Please, let me have a quick swallow of that red stuff there, because I am exhausted and famished.” For that reason Esau was [also] called Edom (Red). 31 Jacob answered, “First sell me your birthright (the rights of a firstborn).” 32 Esau said, “Look, I am about to die [if I do not eat soon]; so of what use is this birthright to me?” 33 Jacob said, “Swear [an oath] to me today [that you are selling it to me for this food]”; so he swore [an oath] to him, and sold him his birthright. 34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and lentil stew; and he ate and drank, and got up and went on his way. In this way Esau scorned his birthright.

Genesis 26
Isaac Settles In Gerar

1 Now there was a famine in the land [of Canaan], besides the previous famine that had occurred in the days of Abraham. So Isaac went to Gerar, to Abimelech king of the Philistines. 2 The LORD appeared to him and said, “Do not go down to Egypt; stay in the land of which I will tell you. 3 Live temporarily [as a resident] in this land and I will be with you and will bless and favor you, for I will give all these lands to you and to your descendants, and I will establish and carry out the oath which I swore to Abraham your father. 4 I will make your descendants multiply as the stars of the heavens, and will give to your descendants all these lands; and by your descendants shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, 5 because Abraham listened to and obeyed My voice and [consistently] kept My charge, My commandments, My statutes, and My laws.”
6 So Isaac stayed in Gerar. 7 The men of the place asked him about his wife, and he said, “She is my sister,” for he was afraid to say, “my wife”—thinking, “the men of the place might kill me on account of Rebekah, since she is very beautiful.” 8 It happened when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out of a window and saw Isaac caressing Rebekah his wife. 9 Then Abimelech called Isaac and said, “See here, Rebekah is in fact your wife! How did you [dare to] say to me, ‘She is my sister’?” And Isaac said to him, “Because I thought I might be killed because of her [desirability].” 10 Abimelech said, “What is this that you have done to us? One of the men [among our people] might easily have been intimate with your wife, and you would have brought guilt on us [before God].” 11 Then Abimelech commanded all his people, “Whoever touches this man [Isaac] or his wife [Rebekah] shall without exception be put to death.”
12 Then Isaac planted [seed] in that land [as a farmer] and reaped in the same year a hundred times [as much as he had planted], and the LORD blessed and favored him. 13 And the man [Isaac] became great and gained more and more until he became very wealthy and extremely distinguished; 14 he owned flocks and herds and a great household [with a number of servants], and the Philistines envied him. 15 Now all the wells which his father’s servants had dug in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines stopped up by filling them with dirt. 16 Then Abimelech said to Isaac, “Go away from here, because you are far too powerful for us.” 17 So Isaac left that region and camped in the Valley of Gerar, and settled there.
Quarrel over the Wells 18 Now Isaac again dug [and reopened] the wells of water which had been dug in the days of Abraham his father, because the Philistines had filled them up [with dirt] after the death of Abraham; and he gave the wells the same names that his father had given them. 19 But when Isaac’s servants dug in the valley and found there a well of flowing [spring] water, 20 the herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac’s herdsmen, saying, “The water is ours!” So Isaac named the well Esek (quarreling), because they quarreled with him. 21 Then his servants dug another well, and they quarreled over that also, so Isaac named it Sitnah (enmity). 22 He moved away from there and dug another well, and they did not quarrel over that one; so he named it Rehoboth (broad places), saying, “For now the LORD has made room for us, and we shall be prosperous in the land.”
23 Then he went up from there to Beersheba. 24 The LORD appeared to him the same night and said,
“I am the God of Abraham your father;
Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
I will bless and favor you, and multiply your descendants,
For the sake of My servant Abraham.”
25 So Isaac built an altar there and called on the name of the LORD [in prayer]. He pitched his tent there; and there Isaac’s servants dug a well.
Covenant with Abimelech 26 Then Abimelech came to him from Gerar with Ahuzzath, his [close friend and confidential] adviser, and Phicol, the commander of his army. 27 Isaac said to them, “Why have you [people] come to me, since you hate me and have sent me away from you?” 28 They said, “We see clearly that the LORD has been with you; so we said, ‘There should now be an oath between us [with a curse for the one who breaks it], that is, between you and us, and let us make a covenant (binding agreement, solemn promise) with you, 29 that you will not harm us, just as we have not touched you and have done nothing but good to you and have sent you away in peace. You are now the blessed and favored of the LORD!’” 30 Then Isaac held a [formal] banquet (covenant feast) for them, and they ate and drank. 31 They got up early in the morning and swore oaths [pledging to do nothing but good to each other]; and Isaac sent them on their way and they left him in peace. 32 Now on the same day, Isaac’s servants came and told him about the well they had dug, saying, “We have found water.” 33 So he named the well Shibah; therefore the name of the city is Beersheba to this day.

34 When Esau was forty years old he married Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite as his wives; 35 and they were a source of grief to [Esau’s parents] Isaac and Rebekah.

Genesis 27
Jacob’s Deception

1 Now when Isaac was old and his eyes were too dim to see, he called his elder [and favorite] son Esau and said to him, “My son.” And Esau answered him, “Here I am.” 2 Isaac said, “See here, I am old; I do not know when I may die. 3 So now, please take your [hunting] gear, your quiver [of arrows] and your bow, and go out into the open country and hunt game for me; 4 and make me a savory and delicious dish [of meat], the kind I love, and bring it to me to eat, so that my soul may bless you [as my firstborn son] before I die.”
5 But Rebekah overheard what Isaac said to Esau his son; and when Esau had gone to the open country to hunt for game that he might bring back, 6 Rebekah said to Jacob her [younger and favorite] son, “Listen carefully: I heard your father saying to Esau your brother, 7 ‘Bring me some game and make me a savory and delicious dish [of meat], so that I may eat it, and declare my blessing on you in the presence of the LORD before my death.’ 8 So now, my son, listen [carefully] to me [and do exactly] as I command you. 9 Go now to the flock and bring me two good and suitable young goats, and I will make them into a savory dish [of meat] for your father, the kind he loves [to eat]. 10 “Then you shall bring it to your father to eat, so that he may bless you before his death.” 11 Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, “Listen, Esau my brother is a hairy man and I am a smooth [skinned] man. 12 “Suppose my father touches me and feels my skin; then I will be seen by him as a cheat (imposter), and I will bring his curse on me and not a blessing.” 13 But his mother said to him, “May your curse be on me, my son; only listen and obey me, and go, bring the young goats to me.” 14 So Jacob went and got the two young goats, and brought them to his mother; and his mother prepared a delicious dish of food [with a delightful aroma], the kind his father loved [to eat]. 15 Then Rebekah took her elder son Esau’s best clothes, which were with her in her house, and put them on Jacob her younger son. 16 And she put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the smooth part of his neck. 17 Then she gave her son Jacob the delicious meat and the bread which she had prepared.
18 So he went to his father and said, “My father.” And Isaac said, “Here I am. Who are you, my son?” 19 Jacob said to his father, “I am Esau your firstborn; I have done what you told me to do. Now please, sit up and eat some of my game, so that you may bless me.” 20 Isaac said to his son, “How is it that you have found the game so quickly, my son?” And he said, “Because the LORD your God caused it to come to me.” 21 But Isaac [wondered and] said to Jacob, “Please come close [to me] so that I may touch you, my son, and determine if you are really my son Esau or not.” 22 So Jacob approached Isaac, and his father touched him and said, “The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.” 23 He could not recognize him [as Jacob], because his hands were hairy like his brother Esau’s hands; so he blessed him. 24 But he said, “Are you really my son Esau?” Jacob answered, “I am.” 25 Then Isaac said, “Bring the food to me, and I will eat some of my son’s game, so that I may bless you.” He brought it to him, and he ate; and he brought him wine and he drank. 26 Then his father Isaac said to him, “Please come, my son, and kiss me.” 27 So he came and kissed him; and Isaac smelled his clothing and blessed him and said,
“The scent of my son [Esau]
Is like the aroma of a field which the LORD has blessed;
28 Now may God give you of the dew of heaven [to water your land],
And of the fatness (fertility) of the earth,
And an abundance of grain and new wine;
29 May peoples serve you,
And nations bow down to you;
Be lord and master over your brothers,
And may your mother’s sons bow down to you.
May those who curse you be cursed,
And may those who bless you be blessed.”
The Stolen Blessing 30 Now as soon as Isaac had finished blessing Jacob, and Jacob had scarcely left the presence of Isaac his father, Esau his brother came in from his hunting. 31 Esau also made a delicious dish [of meat] and brought it to his father and said to him, “Let my father get up and eat some of his son’s game, so that you may bless me.” 32 Isaac his father said to him, “Who are you?” And he replied, “I am your son, your firstborn, Esau.” 33 Then Isaac trembled violently, and he said, “Then who was the one [who was just here] who hunted game and brought it to me? I ate all of it before you came, and I blessed him. Yes, and he [in fact] shall be (shall remain) blessed.” 34 When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried out with a great and extremely bitter cry and said to his father, “Bless me, even me also, O my father!” 35 Isaac said, “Your brother came deceitfully and has [fraudulently] taken away your blessing [for himself].” 36 Esau replied, “Is he not rightly named Jacob (the supplanter)? For he has supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright, and now he has taken away my blessing. Have you not reserved a blessing for me?” 37 But Isaac replied to Esau, “Listen carefully: I have made Jacob your lord and master; I have given him all his brothers and relatives as servants; and I have sustained him with grain and new wine. What then, can I do for you, my son?” 38 Esau said to his father, “Have you only one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me also, O my father.” Then Esau [no longer able to restrain himself] raised his voice and wept [loudly].
39 Then Isaac his father answered and [prophesied and] said to him,
“Your dwelling shall be away from the fertility of the earth
And away from the dew of heaven above;
40 But you shall live by your sword,
And serve your brother;
However it shall come to pass when you break loose [from your anger and hatred],
That you will tear his yoke off your neck [and you will be free of him].”
41 So Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father blessed him; and Esau said in his heart, “The days of mourning for my father are very near; then I will kill my brother Jacob.” 42 When these words of her elder son Esau were repeated to Rebekah, she sent for Jacob her younger son, and said to him, “Listen carefully, your brother Esau is comforting himself concerning you by planning to kill you. 43 So now, my son, listen and do what I say; go, escape to my brother Laban in Haran! 44 Stay with him for a while, until your brother’s anger subsides. 45 “When your brother’s anger toward you subsides and he forgets what you did to him, then I will send and bring you back from there. Why should I be deprived of you both in a single day?”
46 Then Rebekah said to Isaac, “I am tired of living because of the daughters of Heth [these insolent wives of Esau]. If Jacob takes a wife from the daughters of Heth, like these daughters of the land, what good will my life be to me?”

Genesis 28
Jacob Is Sent Away

1 So Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and charged him, and said to him, “You shall not marry one of the women of Canaan. 2 Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of Bethuel your mother’s father; and take from there as a wife for yourself one of the daughters of Laban your mother’s brother. 3 May God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, so that you may become a [great] company of peoples. 4 “May He also give the blessing of Abraham to you and your descendants with you, that you may inherit the [promised] land of your sojournings, which He gave to Abraham.” 5 Then Isaac sent Jacob away, and he went to Paddan-aram, to Laban, son of Bethuel the Aramean, the brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau.
6 Now Esau noticed that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him to Paddan-aram to take a wife for himself from there, and that as he blessed him he gave him a prohibition, saying, “You shall not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan,” 7 and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and had gone to Paddan-aram. 8 So Esau realized that [his two wives] the daughters of Canaan displeased Isaac his father; 9 and [to appease his parents] Esau went to [the family of] Ishmael and took as his wife, in addition to the wives he [already] had, Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, the sister of Nebaioth [Ishmael’s firstborn son].
Jacob’s Dream 10 Now Jacob left Beersheba [never to see his mother again] and traveled toward Haran. 11 And he came to a certain place and stayed overnight there because the sun had set. Taking one of the stones of the place, he put it under his head and lay down there [to sleep]. 12 He dreamed that there was a ladder (stairway) placed on the earth, and the top of it reached [out of sight] toward heaven; and [he saw] the angels of God ascending and descending on it [going to and from heaven]. 13 And behold, the LORD stood above and around him and said, “I am the LORD, the God of Abraham your [father’s] father and the God of Isaac; I will give to you and to your descendants the land [of promise] on which you are lying. 14 Your descendants shall be as [countless as] the dust of the earth, and you shall spread abroad to the west and the east and the north and the south; and all the families (nations) of the earth shall be blessed through you and your descendants. 15 “Behold, I am with you and will keep [careful watch over you and guard] you wherever you may go, and I will bring you back to this [promised] land; for I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.” 16 Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and he said, “Without any doubt the LORD is in this place, and I did not realize it.” 17 So he was afraid and said, “How fearful and awesome is this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gateway to heaven.”
18 So Jacob got up early in the morning, and took the stone he had put under his head and he set it up as a pillar [that is, a monument to the vision in his dream], and he poured [olive] oil on the top of it [to consecrate it]. 19 He named that place Bethel (the house of God); the previous name of that city was Luz (Almond Tree). 20 Then Jacob made a vow (promise), saying, “If God will be with me and will keep me on this journey that I take, and will give me food to eat and clothing to wear, 21 and if [He grants that] I return to my father’s house in safety, then the LORD will be my God. 22 “This stone which I have set up as a pillar (monument, memorial) will be God’s house [a sacred place to me], and of everything that You give me I will give the tenth to You [as an offering to signify my gratitude and dependence on You].”

Genesis 29
Jacob Meets Rachel

1 Then Jacob went on his way and came to the land of the people of the East [near Haran]. 2 As he looked, he saw a well in the field, and three flocks of sheep lying there [resting] beside it because the flocks were watered from that well. Now the stone on the mouth of the well [that covered and protected it] was large, 3 and when all the flocks were gathered there, the shepherds would roll the stone from the mouth of the well, water the sheep, and [afterward] replace the stone on the mouth of the well.
4 Jacob said to them, “My brothers, where are you from?” And they said, “We are from Haran.” 5 So he said to them, “Do you know Laban the grandson of Nahor [Abraham’s brother]?” And they replied, “We know him.” 6 And he asked them, “Is it well with him?” And they said, “He is doing well; look, here comes his daughter Rachel with the sheep!” 7 Jacob said, “Look, the sun is still high [overhead]; it is a long time before the flocks need to be gathered [in their folds for the night]. Water the sheep, and go, and return them to their pasture.” 8 But they said, “We cannot [leave] until all the flocks are gathered together, and the shepherds roll the stone from the mouth of the well; then we will water the sheep.”
9 While he was still speaking with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep, for she was a shepherdess. 10 When Jacob saw [his cousin] Rachel, the daughter of Laban, his mother’s brother, and Laban’s sheep, he came up and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered the flock of Laban, his uncle. 11 Then Jacob kissed Rachel [in greeting], and he raised his voice and wept. 12 Jacob told Rachel he was her father’s relative, Rebekah’s son; and she ran and told her father.
13 When Laban heard of the arrival of Jacob, his sister’s son, he ran to meet him, and embraced and kissed him and brought him to his house. Then he told Laban all these things. 14 Then Laban said to him, “You are my bone and my flesh.” And Jacob stayed with him a month.
15 Then Laban said to Jacob, “Just because you are my relative, should you work for me for nothing? Tell me, what should your wages be?” 16 Now Laban had two daughters; the name of the older was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel. 17 Leah’s eyes were weak, but Rachel was beautiful in form and appearance. 18 Jacob loved Rachel, so he said, “I will serve you [as a hired workman] for seven years [in return] for [the privilege of marrying] Rachel your younger daughter.” 19 Laban said, “It is better that I give her [in marriage] to you than give her to another man. Stay and work with me.” 20 So Jacob served [Laban] for seven years for [the right to marry] Rachel, but they seemed like only a few days to him because of his love for her.

Laban’s Treachery 21 Finally, Jacob said to Laban, “Give me my wife, for my time [of service] is completed, so that I may take her to me [as my wife].” 22 So Laban gathered together all the men of the place and prepared a [wedding] feast [with wine]. 23 But in the evening he took Leah his daughter and brought her to Jacob, and Jacob went in to [consummate the marriage with] her. 24 Laban also gave Zilpah his maid to his daughter Leah as a maid. 25 But in the morning [when Jacob awoke], it was Leah [who was with him]! And he said to Laban, “What is this that you have done to me? Did I not work for you [for seven years] for Rachel? Why have you deceived and betrayed me [like this]?” 26 But Laban only said, “It is not the tradition here to give the younger [daughter in marriage] before the older. 27 “Finish the week [of the wedding feast] for Leah; then we will give you Rachel also, and in return you shall work for me for seven more years.” 28 So Jacob complied and fulfilled Leah’s week [of celebration]; then Laban gave him his daughter Rachel as his [second] wife. 29 Laban also gave Bilhah his maid to his daughter Rachel as a maid. 30 So Jacob consummated his marriage and lived with Rachel [as his wife], and he loved Rachel more than Leah, and he served with Laban for another seven years.
31 Now when the LORD saw that Leah was unloved, He made her able to bear children, but Rachel was barren. 32 Leah conceived and gave birth to a son and named him Reuben (See, a son!), for she said, “Because the LORD has seen my humiliation and suffering; now my husband will love me [since I have given him a son].” 33 Then she conceived again and gave birth to a son and said, “Because the LORD heard that I am unloved, He has given me this son also.” So she named him Simeon (God hears). 34 She conceived again and gave birth to a son and said, “Now this time my husband will become attached to me [as a companion], for I have given him three sons.” Therefore he was named Levi. 35 Again she conceived and gave birth to a [fourth] son, and she said, “Now I will praise the LORD.” So she named him Judah; then [for a time] she stopped bearing [children].

Genesis 30
The Sons Of Jacob

1 When Rachel saw that she conceived no children for Jacob, she envied her sister, and said to Jacob, “Give me children, or else I will die.” 2 Then Jacob became furious with Rachel, and he said, “Am I in the place of God, who has denied you children?” 3 She said, “Here, take my maid Bilhah and go in to her; and [when the baby comes] she shall deliver it [while sitting] on my knees, so that by her I may also have children [to count as my own].” 4 So she gave him Bilhah her maid as a [secondary] wife, and Jacob went in to her. 5 Bilhah conceived and gave birth to a son for Jacob. 6 Then Rachel said, “God has judged and vindicated me, and has heard my plea and has given me a son [through my maid].” So she named him Dan (He judged). 7 Bilhah, Rachel’s maid, conceived again and gave birth to a second son for Jacob. 8 So Rachel said, “With mighty wrestlings [in prayer to God] I have struggled with my sister and have prevailed.” So she named him Naphtali (my wrestlings).
9 When Leah saw that she had stopped bearing [children], she took Zilpah her maid and gave her to Jacob as a [secondary] wife. 10 Zilpah, Leah’s maid, gave birth to a son for Jacob. 11 Then Leah said, “How fortunate!” So she named him Gad (good fortune). 12 Zilpah, Leah’s maid, gave birth to a second son for Jacob. 13 Then Leah said, “I am happy! For women will call me happy.” So she named him Asher (happy).
14 Now at the time of wheat harvest Reuben [the eldest child] went and found some mandrakes in the field, and brought them to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, “Please give me some of your son’s mandrakes.” 15 But Leah answered, “Is it a small thing that you have taken my husband? Would you take away my son’s mandrakes also?” So Rachel said, “Jacob shall sleep with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.” 16 When Jacob came in from the field in the evening, Leah went out to meet him and said, “You must sleep with me [tonight], for I have in fact hired you with my son’s mandrakes.” So he slept with her that night. 17 God listened and answered [the prayer of] Leah, and she conceived and gave birth to a fifth son for Jacob. 18 Then Leah said, “God has given me my reward because I have given my maid to my husband.” So she named him Issachar. 19 Leah conceived again and gave birth to a sixth son for Jacob. 20 Then Leah said, “God has endowed me with a good [marriage] gift [for my husband]; now he will live with me [regarding me with honor as his wife], because I have given birth to six sons.” So she named him Zebulun. 21 Afterward she gave birth to a daughter and named her Dinah.
22 Then God remembered [the prayers of] Rachel, and God thought of her and opened her womb [so that she would conceive]. 23 So she conceived and gave birth to a son; and she said, “God has taken away my disgrace and humiliation.” 24 She named him Joseph (may He add) and said, “May the LORD add to me another son.”
Jacob Prospers 25 Now when Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, “Send me away, that I may go back to my own place and to my own country. 26 “Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served you, and let me go; for you know the work which I have done for you.” 27 But Laban said to him, “If I have found favor in your sight, stay with me; for I have learned [from the omens in divination and by experience] that the LORD has blessed me because of you.” 28 He said, “Name your wages, and I will give it [to you].” 29 Jacob answered him, “You know how I have served you and how your possessions, your cattle and sheep and goats, have fared with me. 30 “For you had little before I came and it has increased and multiplied abundantly, and the LORD has favored you with blessings wherever I turned. But now, when shall I provide for my own household?” 31 Laban asked, “What shall I give you?” Jacob replied, “You shall not give me anything. But if you will do this one thing for me [which I now propose], I will again pasture and keep your flock: 32 Let me pass through your entire flock today, removing from it every speckled and spotted sheep and every dark or black one among the lambs and the spotted and speckled among the goats; and those shall be my wages. 33 “So my honesty will be evident for me later, when you come [for an accounting] concerning my wages. Every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats and dark among the young lambs, if found with me, shall be considered stolen.” 34 And Laban said, “Good! Let it be done as you say.” 35 So on that same day Laban [secretly] removed the male goats that were streaked and spotted and all the female goats that were speckled and spotted, every one with white on it, and all the dark ones among the sheep, and put them in the care of his sons. 36 And he put [a distance of] three days’ journey between himself and Jacob, and Jacob was then left in care of the rest of Laban’s flock.
37 Then Jacob took branches of fresh poplar and almond and plane trees, and peeled white stripes in them, exposing the white in the branches. 38 Then he set the branches which he had peeled in front of the flocks in the watering troughs, where the flocks came to drink; and they mated and conceived when they came to drink. 39 So the flocks mated and conceived by the branches, and the flocks gave birth to streaked, speckled, and spotted offspring. 40 Jacob separated the lambs, and [as he had done with the peeled branches] he made the flocks face toward the streaked and all the dark or black in the [new] flock of Laban; and he put his own herds apart by themselves and did not put them [where they could breed] with Laban’s flock. 41 Furthermore, whenever the stronger [animals] of the flocks were breeding, Jacob would place the branches in the sight of the flock in the watering troughs, so that they would mate and conceive among the branches; 42 but when the flock was sickly, he did not put the branches there; so the sicker [animals] were Laban’s and the stronger Jacob’s. 43 So Jacob became exceedingly prosperous, and had large flocks [of sheep and goats], and female and male servants, and camels and donkeys.

Genesis 31
Jacob Leaves Secretly For Canaan

1 Jacob heard that Laban’s sons were saying: “Jacob has taken away everything that was our father’s, and from what belonged to our father he has acquired all this wealth and honor.” 2J acob noticed [a change in] the attitude of Laban, and saw that it was not friendly toward him as before. 3 Then the LORD said to Jacob, “Return to the land of your fathers and to your people, and I will be with you.” 4 So Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to his flock in the field, 5 and he said to them, “I see [a change in] your father’s attitude, that he is not friendly toward me as [he was] before; but the God of my father [Isaac] has been with me. 6 You know that I have served your father with all my strength. 7 Yet your father has cheated me [as often as possible] and changed my wages ten times; but God did not allow him to hurt me. 8 If he said, ‘The speckled shall be your wages,’ then the entire flock gave birth to speckled [young]; and if he said, ‘The streaked shall be your wages,’ then the entire flock gave birth to streaked [young]. 9 Thus God has taken away the flocks of your father and given them to me. 10 And it happened at the time when the flock conceived that I looked up and saw in a dream that the rams which mated [with the female goats] were streaked, speckled, and spotted. 11 And the Angel of God said to me in the dream, ‘Jacob.’ And I said, ‘Here I am.’ 12 He said, ‘Look up and see, all the rams which are mating [with the flock] are streaked, speckled, and spotted; for I have seen all that Laban has been doing to you. 1 3‘I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed the pillar, and where you made a vow to Me; now stand up, leave this land, and return to the land of your birth.’” 14 Rachel and Leah answered him, “Is there still any portion or inheritance for us in our father’s house? 15 Are we not counted by him as foreigners? For he sold us [to you in marriage], and has also entirely used up our purchase price. 16 “Surely all the riches which God has taken from our father are ours and our children’s. Now then, whatever God has told you to do, do it.”
17 Then Jacob stood [and took action] and put his children and his wives on camels; 18 and he drove away all his livestock and [took along] all his property which he had acquired, the livestock he had obtained and accumulated in Paddan-aram, to go to his father Isaac in the land of Canaan. 19 When Laban had gone to shear his sheep, Rachel [went inside the house and] stole her father’s household gods. 20 And Jacob deceived Laban the Aramean (Syrian) by not telling him that he intended to leave and he slipped away secretly. 21 So he fled with everything that he had, and got up and crossed the river [Euphrates], and set his face toward the hill country of Gilead [east of the Jordan River].
Laban Pursues Jacob 22 On the third day [after his departure] Laban was told that Jacob had fled. 23 So he took his relatives with him and pursued him for seven days, and they overtook him in the hill country of Gilead. 24 God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream at night and said to him, “Be careful that you do not speak to Jacob, either good or bad.”
25 Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent on the hill, and Laban with his relatives camped on the same hill of Gilead. 26 Then Laban said to Jacob, “What do you mean by deceiving me and leaving without my knowledge, and carrying off my daughters as if [they were] captives of the sword? 27 Why did you run away secretly and deceive me and not tell me, so that [otherwise] I might have sent you away with joy and with songs, with [music on the] tambourine and lyre? 28 And why did you not allow me to kiss my grandchildren and my daughters [goodbye]? Now you have done a foolish thing [in behaving like this]. 29 It is in my power to harm you, but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, ‘Be careful not to speak to Jacob, either good or bad.’ 30 “Now [I suppose] you felt you must go because you were homesick for your father’s house and family; but why did you steal my [household] gods?” 31 Jacob answered Laban, “[I left secretly] because I was afraid, for I thought you would take your daughters away from me by force. 32 “The one with whom you find your gods shall not live; in the presence of our relatives [search my possessions and] point out whatever you find that belongs to you and take it.” For Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen the idols.

33 So Laban went into Jacob’s tent and into Leah’s tent and the tent of the two maids, but he did not find them. Then he came out of Leah’s tent and entered Rachel’s tent. 34 Now Rachel had taken the household idols and put them in the camel’s saddlebag and sat on them. Laban searched through all her tent, but did not find them. 35 So Rachel said to her father, “Do not be displeased, my lord, that I cannot rise before you, for the manner of women is on me and I am unwell.” He searched [further] but did not find the household idols.
36 Then Jacob became angry and argued with Laban. And he said to Laban, “What is my fault? What is my sin that you pursued me like this? 37 Although you have searched through all my possessions, what have you found of your household goods? Put it here before my relatives and your relatives, so that they may decide [who has done right] between the two of us. 38 These twenty years I have been with you; your ewes and your female goats have not lost their young, nor have I eaten the rams of your flocks. 39 I did not bring you the torn carcasses [of the animals attacked by predators]; I [personally] took the loss. You required of me [to make good] everything that was stolen, whether it occurred by day or night. 40 This was my situation: by day the heat consumed me and by night the cold, and I could not sleep. 41 These twenty years I have been in your house; I served you fourteen years for your two daughters and six years for [my share of] your flocks, and you have changed my wages ten times. 42 “If the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and [the Feared One] of Isaac, had not been with me, most certainly you would have sent me away now empty-handed. God has seen my affliction and humiliation and the [exhausting] labor of my hands, so He rendered judgment and rebuked you last night.”
The Covenant of Mizpah 43 Laban answered Jacob, “These women [that you married] are my daughters, these children are my grandchildren, these flocks are [from] my flocks, and all that you see [here] is mine. But what can I do today to these my daughters or to their children to whom they have given birth? 44 “So come now, let us make a covenant, you and I, and let it serve as a witness between you and me.” 45 So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a [memorial] pillar. 46 Jacob said to his relatives, “Gather stones.” And they took stones and made a mound [of stones], and they ate [a ceremonial meal together] there on the mound [of stones]. 47 Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha (stone monument of testimony in Aramaic), but Jacob called it Galeed. 48 Laban said, “This mound [of stones] is a witness [a reminder of the oath taken] today between you and me.” Therefore he [also] called the name Galeed, 49 and Mizpah (watchtower), for Laban said, “May the LORD watch between you and me when we are absent from one another. 50 “If you should mistreat (humiliate, oppress) my daughters, or if you should take other wives besides my daughters, although no one is with us [as a witness], see and remember, God is witness between you and me.” 51 Laban said to Jacob, “Look at this mound [of stones] and look at this pillar which I have set up between you and me. 52 This mound is a witness, and this pillar is a witness, that I will not pass by this mound to harm you, and that you will not pass by this mound and this pillar to harm me. 53 “The God of Abraham [your father] and the God of Nahor [my father], and the god [the image of worship] of their father [Terah, an idolater], judge between us.” But Jacob swore [only] by [the one true God] the Fear of his father Isaac. 54 Then Jacob offered a sacrifice [to the LORD] on the mountain, and called his relatives to the meal; and they ate food and spent the night on the mountain. 55 Early in the morning Laban got up and kissed his grandchildren and his daughters [goodbye] and pronounced a blessing [asking God’s favor] on them. Then Laban left and returned home.

Genesis 32
Jacob’s Fear Of Esau

1 Then as Jacob went on his way, the angels of God met him [to reassure and protect him]. 2 When Jacob saw them, he said, “This is God’s camp.” So he named that place Mahanaim (double camps).
3 Then Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Esau in the land of Seir, the country of Edom. 4 He commanded them, saying, “This is what to say to my lord Esau: ‘Your servant Jacob says this, “I have been living temporarily with Laban, and have stayed there until now; 5 I have oxen, donkeys, flocks, male servants, and female servants; and I have sent [this message] to tell my lord, so that I may find grace and kindness in your sight.”’”
6 The messengers returned to Jacob, saying, “We went to your brother Esau, and now he is coming to meet you, and there are four hundred men with him.” 7 Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed; and he divided the people who were with him, and the flocks and herds and camels, into two camps; 8 and he said, “If Esau comes to the one camp and attacks it, then the other camp which is left will escape.”
9 Jacob said, “O God of my father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, the LORD, who said to me, ‘Return to your country and to your people, and I will make you prosper,’ 10 I am unworthy of all the lovingkindness and compassion and of all the faithfulness which You have shown to Your servant. With only my staff [long ago] I crossed over this Jordan, and now I have become [blessed and increased into these] two groups [of people]. 11 Save me, please, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for I fear him, that he will come and attack me and the mothers with the children. 12 “And You [LORD] said, ‘I will certainly make you prosper and make your descendants as [numerous as] the sand of the sea, which is too great to be counted.’”
13 So Jacob spent the night there. Then he selected a present for his brother Esau from the livestock he had acquired: 14 two hundred female goats, twenty male goats, two hundred ewes, twenty rams, 15 thirty milking camels with their colts, forty cows, ten bulls, twenty female donkeys, and ten [donkey] colts. 16 He put them into the care of his servants, every herd by itself, and said to his servants, “Go on ahead of me, and put an interval [of space] between the individual herds.” 17 Then he commanded the one in front, saying, “When Esau my brother meets you and asks to whom you belong, and where you are going, and whose are the animals in front of you? 18 then you shall say, ‘They are your servant Jacob’s; they are a gift sent to my lord Esau. And he also is behind us.’” 19 And so Jacob commanded the second and the third as well, and all that followed the herds, saying, “This is what you shall say to Esau when you meet him; 20 and you shall say, ‘Look, your servant Jacob is behind us.’” For he said [to himself], “I will try to appease him with the gift that is going ahead of me. Then afterward I will see him; perhaps he will accept and forgive me.” 21 So the gift [of the herds of livestock] went on ahead of him, and he himself spent that night back in the camp.
22 But he got up that same night and took his two wives, his two female servants, and his eleven children, and waded over the ford of the Jabbok. 23 Then he took them and sent them across the brook. And he also sent across whatever he had. Jacob Wrestles 24 So Jacob was left alone, and a Man [came and] wrestled with him until daybreak. 25 When the Man saw that He had not prevailed against Jacob, He touched his hip joint; and Jacob’s hip was dislocated as he wrestled with Him. 26 Then He said, “Let Me go, for day is breaking.” But Jacob said, “I will not let You go unless You declare a blessing on me.” 27 So He asked him, “What is your name?” And he said, “Jacob.” 28 And He said, “Your name shall no longer be Jacob, but Israel; for you have struggled with God and with men and have prevailed.” 29 Then Jacob asked Him, “Please tell me Your name.” But He said, “Why is it that you ask My name?” And He declared a blessing [of the covenant promises] on Jacob there. 30 So Jacob named the place Peniel (the face of God), saying, “For I have seen God face to face, yet my life has not been snatched away.” 31 Now the sun rose on him as he passed Penuel (Peniel), and he was limping because of his hip. 32 Therefore, to this day the Israelites do not eat the tendon of the hip which is on the socket of the thigh, because He touched the socket of Jacob’s thigh by the tendon of the hip.

Genesis 33
Jacob Meets Esau

1 Then Jacob looked up, and saw Esau coming with four hundred men. So he divided the children among Leah and Rachel and the two maids. 2 He put the maids and their children in front, Leah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph last of all. 3 Then Jacob crossed over [the stream] ahead of them and bowed himself to the ground seven times [bowing and moving forward each time], until he approached his brother.
4 But Esau ran to meet him and embraced him, and hugged his neck and kissed him, and they wept [for joy]. 5 Esau looked up and saw the women and the children, and said, “Who are these with you?” So Jacob replied, “They are the children whom God has graciously given your servant.” 6 Then the maids approached with their children, and they bowed down. 7 Leah also approached with her children, and they bowed down. Afterward Joseph and Rachel approached, and they bowed down. 8 Esau asked, “What do you mean by all this company which I have met?” And he answered, “[These are] to find favor in the sight of my lord.” 9 But Esau said, “I have plenty, my brother; keep what you have for yourself.” 10 Jacob replied, “No, please, if now I have found favor in your sight, then accept my gift [as a blessing] from my hand, for I see your face as if I had seen the face of God, and you have received me favorably. 11 “Please accept my blessing (gift) which has been brought to you, for God has dealt graciously with me and I have everything [that I could possibly want].” So Jacob kept urging him and Esau accepted it.
12 Then Esau said, “Let us get started on our journey and I will go in front of you [to lead the way].” 13 But Jacob replied, “You know, my lord, that the children are frail and need gentle care, and the nursing flocks and herds [with young] are of concern to me; for if the men should drive them hard for a single day, all the flocks will die. 14 “Please let my lord go on ahead of his servant, and I will move on slowly, governed by the pace of the livestock that are in front of me and according to the endurance of the children, until I come to my lord in Seir [in Edom].”
15 Then Esau said, “Please let me leave with you some of the people who are with me.” But Jacob said, “What need is there [for it]? Let me find favor in the sight of my lord.” 16 So Esau turned back [toward the south] that day on his way to Seir. 17 But Jacob journeyed [north] to Succoth, and built himself a house and made shelters for his livestock; so the name of the place is Succoth (huts, shelters).
Jacob Settles in Shechem 18 When Jacob came from Paddan-aram, he arrived safely and in peace at the city of Shechem, in the land of Canaan, and camped in front of the [walled] city. 19 Then he bought the piece of land on which he had pitched his tents from the sons of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for a hundred pieces of money. 20 There he erected an altar and called it El-Elohe-Israel.

Genesis 34
The Treachery Of Jacob’s Sons

1 Now Dinah the daughter of Leah, whom she had borne to Jacob, went out [unescorted] to visit the girls of the land. 2 When Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince (sheik) of the land, saw her, he kidnapped her and lay [intimately] with her by force [humbling and offending her]. 3 But his soul longed for and clung to Dinah daughter of Jacob, and he loved the girl and spoke comfortingly to her young heart’s wishes. 4 So Shechem said to his father Hamor, “Get me this young woman as a wife.” 5 Now Jacob heard that Shechem had defiled (violated) Dinah his daughter; but his sons were in the field with his livestock, so Jacob said nothing until they came in. 6 But Shechem’s father Hamor went to Jacob to talk with him. 7 Now when Jacob’s sons heard of it they came in from the field; they were deeply grieved, and they were very angry, for Shechem had done a disgraceful thing to Israel by lying with Jacob’s daughter, for such a thing is not to be done.
8 But Hamor conferred with them, saying, “The soul of my son Shechem [deeply] longs for your daughter [and sister]. Please give her to him as his wife. 9 And [beyond that] intermarry with us; give your daughters to us [as wives] and take our daughters for yourselves. 10 “In this way you shall live with us; the country will be open to you; live and do business in it and acquire property and possessions in it.” 11 Shechem also said to Dinah’s father and to her brothers, “Let me find favor in your sight, and I will give you whatever you ask of me. 12 “Demand of me a very large bridal payment and gift [as compensation for giving up your daughter and sister], and I will give you whatever you tell me; only give me the girl to be my wife.”
13 Jacob’s sons answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, because Shechem had defiled and disgraced their sister Dinah. 14 They said to them, “We cannot do this thing and give our sister [in marriage] to one who is not circumcised, because that would be a disgrace to us. 15 But we will consent to you only on this condition: if you will become like us, in that every male among you consents to be circumcised, 16 then we will give our daughters to you [in marriage], and we will take your daughters for ourselves, and we will live with you and become one people. 17 “But if you do not listen to us and refuse to be circumcised, then we will take our daughter [Dinah] and go.”
18 Their words seemed reasonable to Hamor and his son Shechem, 19 and the young man did not hesitate to do the [required] thing, for he was delighted with Jacob’s daughter. Now he was more respected and honored than all [others] in the household of his father. 20 Then Hamor and Shechem his son came to the gate of their [walled] city [where the leading men would meet] and spoke with the men of the city, saying, 21 “These men are peaceful and friendly with us; so let them live in the land and do business in it, for the land is large enough [for us and] for them; let us take their daughters for wives and let us give them our daughters [in marriage]. 22 But only on this condition will the men consent to our request that they live among us and become one people: that every male among us become circumcised just as they are circumcised. 23 “Will not their cattle and their possessions and all their animals be ours [if we do this]? Let us consent [to do as they ask], and they will live here with us.” 24 And every [Canaanite] man who went out of the city gate listened and considered what Hamor and Shechem said; and every male who was a resident of that city was circumcised.
25 Now on the third day [after the circumcision], when all the men were [terribly] sore and in pain, two of Jacob’s sons, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s [full] brothers, took their swords, boldly entered the city [without anyone suspecting them of evil intent], and they killed every male. 26 They killed Hamor and his son Shechem with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem’s house [where she was staying], and left. 27 Then Jacob’s [other] sons came upon those who were killed and looted the town, because their sister had been defiled and disgraced. 28 They took the Canaanites’ flocks and their herds and their donkeys, and whatever was in the city and in the field; 29 they looted all their wealth, and [took captive] all their children and their wives, even everything that was in the houses. 30 Then Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, “You have ruined me, making me a stench to the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites and the Perizzites! My men are few in number, and the men of the land will band together against me and attack me; I shall be destroyed, I and my household.” 31 But they said, “Should he [be permitted to] treat our sister as a prostitute?”

Genesis 35
Jacob Moves To Bethel

1 Then God said to Jacob, “Go up to Bethel and live there, and make an altar there to God, who appeared to you [in a distinct manifestation] when you fled [years ago] from Esau your brother.” 2 Then Jacob said to his household and to all who were with him, “Get rid of the [idols and images of] foreign gods that are among you, and ceremonially purify yourselves and change [into fresh] clothes; 3 then let us get up and go up to Bethel, and I will make an altar there to God, who answered me in the day of my distress and has been with me wherever I have gone.” 4 So they gave Jacob all the [idols and images of the] foreign gods they had and the rings which were in their ears [worn as charms against evil], and Jacob buried them under the oak tree near Shechem.
5 As they journeyed, there was a great [supernatural] terror [sent from God] on the cities around them, and [for that reason] the Canaanites did not pursue the sons of Jacob. 6 So Jacob came to Luz (that is, Bethel), which is in the land of Canaan, he and all the people who were with him. 7 There he built an altar [to worship the LORD], and called the place El-bethel (God of the House of God), because there God had revealed Himself to him when he escaped from his brother. 8 Now Deborah, [who once was] Rebekah’s nurse, died and was buried below Bethel under the oak; and the name of it was called Allon-bacuth (Oak of Weeping).
Jacob Is Named Israel 9 Then God [in a visible manifestation] appeared to Jacob again when he came out of Paddan-aram, and declared a blessing on him. 10 Again God said to him,
“Your name is Jacob;
You shall no longer be called Jacob,
But Israel shall be your name.”
So he was called Israel. 11 And God said to him,
“I am God Almighty.
Be fruitful and multiply;
A nation and a company of nations shall come from you,
And kings shall be born of your loins.
12 “The land which I gave Abraham and Isaac
I will give to you,
and to your descendants after you I will give the land.”
13 Then God ascended from Jacob in the place where He had spoken with him. 14 Jacob set up a pillar (memorial, monument) in the place where he had talked with God, a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering [of wine] on it; he also poured oil on it [to declare it sacred for God’s purpose]. 15 So Jacob named the place where God had spoken with him, Bethel (the House of God).
16 Then they journeyed from Bethel; and when there was still some distance to go to Ephrath (Bethlehem), Rachel began to give birth and had difficulty and suffered severely. 17 When she was in hard labor the midwife said to her, “Do not be afraid; you now have another son.” 18 And as her soul was departing, (for she died), she named him Ben-oni (son of my sorrow); but his father called him Benjamin (son of the right hand). 19 So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem). 20 Jacob set a pillar (memorial, monument) on her grave; that is the pillar of Rachel’s grave to this day. 21 Then Israel (Jacob) journeyed on and pitched his tent on the other side of the tower of Eder [the lookout point used by shepherds].
22 While Israel was living in that land, Reuben [his eldest son] went and lay with Bilhah his father’s concubine, and Israel heard about it.
The Sons of Israel 23 Now Jacob had twelve sons— 24 The sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn, then Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun; 25 and the sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin; 26 and the sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s maid: Dan and Naphtali; 27 and the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s maid: Gad and Asher. These are the sons of Jacob born to him in Paddan-aram.
28 Jacob came to Isaac his father at Mamre of Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac had lived temporarily.
29 Now the days of Isaac were a hundred and eighty years. 30 Isaac’s spirit departed and he died and was gathered to his people [who had preceded him in death], an old man full of days (satisfied, fulfilled); his sons Esau and Jacob buried him [in the cave of Machpelah with his parents Abraham and Sarah].

Genesis 36
Esau Moves

1 Now these are the records of the descendants of Esau, (that is, Edom).

2 Esau took his [three] wives from the daughters of Canaan: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the son of Zibeon the Hivite, 3 and Basemath, Ishmael’s daughter, sister of Nebaioth. 4 Adah bore Eliphaz to Esau, and Basemath bore Reuel, 5 and Oholibamah bore Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. These are the sons of Esau born to him in Canaan.
6 Now Esau took his wives and his sons and his daughters and all the members of his household, and his livestock and all his cattle and all his possessions which he had acquired in the land of Canaan, and he went to a land away from his brother Jacob. 7 For their [great flocks and herds and] possessions made it impossible for them to live together [in the same region]; the land in which they lived temporarily could not support them because of their livestock. 8 So Esau lived in the hill country of Seir; Esau is Edom.
Descendants of Esau 9 These are the records of the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in the hill country of Seir. 10 These are the names of Esau’s sons: Eliphaz, the son of Adah, Esau’s wife, and Reuel, the son of Basemath, Esau’s wife. 11 And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz. 12 And Timna was a concubine of Eliphaz, Esau’s son; and she bore Amalek to Eliphaz. These are the sons of Adah, Esau’s wife. 13 These are the sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. These are the sons of Basemath, Esau’s wife. 14 And these are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau’s wife, the daughter of Anah, the son of Zibeon. She bore to Esau: Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.
15 These are the tribal chiefs of the sons of Esau: The sons of Eliphaz, the firstborn of Esau: Chiefs Teman, Omar, Zepho, Kenaz, 16 Korah, Gatam, and Amalek. These are the chiefs of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; they are the sons of Adah. 17 These are the sons of Reuel, Esau’s son: Chiefs Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, Mizzah. These are the chiefs of Reuel in the land of Edom; they are the sons of Basemath, Esau’s wife. 18 These are the sons of Oholibamah, Esau’s wife: Chiefs Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. These are the chiefs born of Oholibamah, daughter of Anah, Esau’s wife. 19 These are the sons of Esau, (that is, Edom), and these are their chiefs.

20 These are the sons of Seir the Horite, the inhabitants of the land: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, 21 Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. These are the chiefs of the Horites, the sons of Seir in the land of Edom. 22 The sons of Lotan are Hori and Hemam; and Lotan’s sister is Timna. 23 The sons of Shobal are these: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam. 24 These are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. This is the Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness as he pastured the donkeys of Zibeon his father. 25 The children of Anah are these: Dishon and Oholibamah [Esau’s wife], the daughter of Anah. 26 These are the sons of Dishon: Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran. 27 Ezer’s sons are these: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan. 28 The sons of Dishan are these: Uz and Aran. 29 The Horite chiefs are these: Chiefs Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, 30 Dishon, Ezer, Dishan. These are the Horite chiefs, according to their various clans in the land of Seir.
31 And these are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the Israelites: 32 Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom, and the name of his city was Dinhabah. 33 Now Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned as his successor. 34 Then Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned as his successor. 35 And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the country of Moab, reigned as his successor. The name of his [walled] city was Avith. 36 Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah succeeded him. 37 Then Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth on the river [Euphrates] reigned as his successor. 38 And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan son of Achbor reigned as his successor. 39 Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, and then Hadar reigned [as his successor]. His [walled] city was Pau; his wife’s name was Mehetabel the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
40 And these are the names of the tribal chiefs of Esau, according to their families and places of residence, by their names: Chiefs Timna, Alvah, Jetheth, 41 Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon, 42 Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar, 43 Magdiel, and Iram. These are the tribal chiefs of Edom (that is, of Esau the father of the Edomites), according to their dwelling places in the land of their possession.

Genesis 37
Joseph’s Dream

1S o Jacob (Israel) lived in the land where his father [Isaac] had been a stranger (sojourner, resident alien), in the land of Canaan. 2 These are the generations of Jacob.
Joseph, when he was seventeen years old, was shepherding the flock with his brothers [Dan, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher]; the boy was with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father’s [secondary] wives; and Joseph brought back a bad report about them to their father. 3 Now Israel (Jacob) loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age; and he made him a [distinctive] multicolored tunic. 4 His brothers saw that their father loved Joseph more than all of his brothers; so they hated him and could not [find it within themselves to] speak to him on friendly terms.
5 Now Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it to his brothers, and they hated him even more. 6 He said to them, “Please listen to [the details of] this dream which I have dreamed; 7 we [brothers] were binding sheaves [of grain stalks] in the field, and lo, my sheaf [suddenly] got up and stood upright and remained standing; and behold, your sheaves stood all around my sheaf and bowed down [in respect].” 8 His brothers said to him, “Are you actually going to reign over us? Are you really going to rule and govern us as your subjects?” So they hated him even more for [telling them about] his dreams and for his [arrogant] words.
9 But Joseph dreamed still another dream, and told it to his brothers [as well]. He said, “See here, I have again dreamed a dream, and lo, [this time I saw] eleven stars and the sun and the moon bowed down [in respect] to me!” 10 He told it to his father as well as to his brothers; but his father rebuked him and said to him [in disbelief], “What is [the meaning of] this dream that you have dreamed? Shall I and your mother and your brothers actually come to bow down to the ground [in respect] before you?” 11 Joseph’s brothers were envious and jealous of him, but his father kept the words [of Joseph] in mind [wondering about their meaning].
12 Then his brothers went to pasture their father’s flock near Shechem. 13 Israel (Jacob) said to Joseph, “Are not your brothers pasturing [the flock] at Shechem? Come, and I will send you to them.” And he said, “Here I am [ready to obey you].” 14 Then Jacob said to him, “Please go and see whether everything is all right with your brothers and all right with the flock; then bring word [back] to me.” So he sent him from the Hebron Valley, and he went to Shechem.
15 Now a certain man found Joseph, and saw that he was wandering around and had lost his way in the field; so the man asked him, “What are you looking for?” 16 He said, “I am looking for my brothers. Please tell me where they are pasturing our flocks.” 17 Then the man said, “[They were here, but] they have moved on from this place. I heard them say, ‘Let us go to Dothan.’” So Joseph went after his brothers and found them at Dothan.
The Plot against Joseph 18 And when they saw him from a distance, even before he came close to them, they plotted to kill him. 19 They said to one another, “Look, here comes this dreamer. 20 “Now then, come and let us kill him and throw him into one of the pits (cisterns, underground water storage); then we will say [to our father], ‘A wild animal killed and devoured him’; and we shall see what will become of his dreams!” 21 Now Reuben [the eldest] heard this and rescued him from their hands and said, “Let us not take his life.” 22 Reuben said to them, “Do not shed his blood, but [instead] throw him [alive] into the pit that is here in the wilderness, and do not lay a hand on him [to kill him]”—[he said this so] that he could rescue him from them and return him [safely] to his father. 23 Now when Joseph reached his brothers, they stripped him of his tunic, the [distinctive] multicolored tunic which he was wearing; 24 then they took him and threw him into the pit. Now the pit was empty; there was no water in it.

25 Then they sat down to eat their meal. When they looked up, they saw a caravan of Ishmaelites coming from Gilead [east of the Jordan], with their camels bearing ladanum resin [for perfume] and balm and myrrh, going on their way to carry the cargo down to Egypt. 26 Judah said to his brothers, “What do we gain if we kill our brother and cover up his blood (murder)? 27 “Come, let us [instead] sell him to these Ishmaelites [and Midianites] and not lay our hands on him, because he is our brother and our flesh.” So his brothers listened to him and agreed. 28 Then as the Midianite [and Ishmaelite] traders were passing by, the brothers pulled Joseph up and lifted him out of the pit, and they sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty shekels of silver. And so they took Joseph [as a captive] into Egypt.
29 Now Reuben [unaware of what had happened] returned to the pit, and [to his great alarm found that] Joseph was not in the pit; so he tore his clothes [in deep sorrow]. 30 He rejoined his brothers and said, “The boy is not there; as for me, where shall I go [to hide from my father]?” 31 Then they took Joseph’s tunic, slaughtered a male goat and dipped the tunic in the blood; 32 and they brought the multicolored tunic to their father, saying, “We have found this; please examine it and decide whether or not it is your son’s tunic.” 33 He recognized it and said, “It is my son’s tunic. A wild animal has devoured him; Joseph is without doubt torn in pieces!” 34 So Jacob tore his clothes [in grief], put on sackcloth and mourned many days for his son. 35 Then all his sons and daughters attempted to console him, but he refused to be comforted and said, “I will go down to Sheol (the place of the dead) in mourning for my son.” And his father wept for him. 36 Meanwhile, in Egypt the Midianites sold Joseph [as a slave] to Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh and the captain of the [royal] guard.

Genesis 38
Judah And Tamar

1 Now at that time, Judah left his brothers and went down to [stay with] a certain Adullamite named Hirah. 2 There Judah saw a daughter of Shua, a Canaanite, and he took her [as his wife] and lived with her. 3 So she conceived and gave birth to a son and Judah named him Er. 4 Then she conceived again and gave birth to a son and named him Onan. 5 Again she conceived and gave birth to still another son and named him Shelah. It was at Chezib that she gave birth to him.
6 Now Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn; her name was Tamar. 7 But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was evil in the sight of the LORD, and the LORD killed him [in judgment]. 8 Then Judah told Onan, “Go in to your brother’s widow, and perform your duty as a brother-in-law [under the levirate marriage custom]; [be her husband and] raise children for [the name of] your brother.” 9 Onan knew that the child (heir) would not be his [but his dead brother’s]; so whenever he lay with his brother’s widow, he spilled his seed on the ground [to prevent conception], so that he would not give a child to his brother. 10 But what he did was displeasing in the sight of the LORD; therefore He killed him also [in judgment]. 11 Then Judah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law, “Remain a widow at your father’s house until Shelah my [youngest] son is grown”; [but he was deceiving her] for he thought that [if Shelah should marry her] he too might die like his brothers did. So Tamar went and lived in her father’s house.
12 But quite a while later, Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shua, died; and when the time of mourning was ended, he went up to his sheepshearers at Timnah with his friend Hirah the Adullamite. 13 Tamar was told, “Listen, your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep.” 14 So she removed her widow’s clothes and covered herself with a veil, and wrapped herself up [in disguise], and sat in the gateway of Enaim, which is on the road to Timnah; for she saw that Shelah had grown up, and she had not been given to him as a wife [as Judah had promised]. 15 When Judah saw her, he thought she was a [temple] prostitute, for she had covered her face [as such women did]. 16 He turned to her by the road, and said, “Please come, let me lie with you”; for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, “What will you give me, that you may lie with me?” 17 He answered, “I will send you a young goat from the flock.” And she said, “Will you give me a pledge [as a deposit] until you send it?” 18 He said, “What pledge shall I give you?” She said, “Your seal and your cord, and the staff that is in your hand.” So he gave them to her and was intimate with her, and she conceived by him. 19 Then she got up and left, and removed her veil and put on her widow’s clothing.
20 When Judah sent the young goat by his friend the Adullamite, to get his pledge [back] from the woman, he was unable to find her. 21 He asked the men of that place, “Where is the temple prostitute who was by the roadside at Enaim?” They said, “There was no prostitute here.” 22 So he returned to Judah, and said, “I cannot find her; also the local men said, ‘There was no prostitute around here.’” 23 Then Judah said, “Let her keep the things (pledge articles) for herself, otherwise we will be a laughingstock [searching everywhere for her]. After all, I sent this young goat, but you did not find her.”
24 About three months later Judah was told, “Tamar your daughter-in-law has played the [role of a] prostitute, and she is with child because of her immorality.” So Judah said, “Bring her out and let her be burned [to death as punishment]!” 25 While she was being brought out, she [took the things Judah had given her and] sent [them along with a message] to her father-in-law, saying, “I am with child by the man to whom these articles belong.” And she added, “Please examine [them carefully] and see [clearly] to whom these things belong, the seal and the cord and staff.” 26 Judah recognized the articles, and said, “She has been more righteous [in this matter] than I, because I did not give her to my son Shelah [as I had promised].” And Judah did not have [intimate] relations with her again.

27 Now when the time came for her to give birth, there were twins in her womb. 28 And when she was in labor, one [baby] put out his hand, and the midwife took his hand and tied a scarlet thread on it, saying, “This one was born first.” 29 But he pulled back his hand, and his brother was born first. And she said, “What a breach you have made for yourself [to be the firstborn]!” So he was named Perez (breach, break forth). 30 Afterward his brother who had the scarlet [thread] on his hand was born and was named Zerah (brightness).

Genesis 39
Joseph’s Success In Egypt

1 Now Joseph had been taken down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an Egyptian officer of Pharaoh, the captain of the [royal] guard, bought him from the Ishmaelites, who had taken him down there. 2 The LORD was with Joseph, and he [even though a slave] became a successful and prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master, the Egyptian. 3 Now his master saw that the LORD was with him and that the LORD caused all that he did to prosper (succeed) in his hand. 4 So Joseph pleased Potiphar and found favor in his sight and he served him as his personal servant. He made Joseph overseer over his house, and he put all that he owned in Joseph’s charge. 5 It happened that from the time that he made Joseph overseer in his house and [put him in charge] over all that he owned, that the LORD blessed the Egyptian’s house because of Joseph; so the LORD’S blessing was on everything that Potiphar owned, in the house and in the field. 6 So Potiphar left all that he owned in Joseph’s charge; and with Joseph there he did not [need to] pay attention to anything except the food he ate.
Now Joseph was handsome and attractive in form and appearance. 7 Then after a time his master’s wife looked at Joseph with desire, and she said, “Lie with me.” 8 But he refused and said to his master’s wife, “Look, with me in the house, my master does not concern himself with anything; he has put everything that he owns in my charge. 9 “He is not greater in this house than I am, nor has he kept anything from me except you, because you are his wife. How then could I do this great evil and sin against God [and your husband]?” 10 And so it was that she spoke to Joseph [persistently] day after day, but he did not listen to her [plea] to lie beside her or be with her. 11 Then it happened one day that Joseph went into the house to attend to his duties, and none of the men of the household was there in the house. 12 She caught Joseph by his [outer] robe, saying, “Lie with me!” But he left his robe in her hand and ran, and got outside [the house]. 13 When she saw that he had left his robe in her hand and had run outside, 14 she called to the men of her household and said to them, “Look at this, your master has brought a Hebrew [into the household] to mock and insult us; he came to me to lie with me, and I screamed. 15 “When he heard me screaming, he left his robe with me and ran outside [the house].” 16 So she left Joseph’s [outer] robe beside her until his master came home. 17 Then she told her husband the same story, saying, “The Hebrew servant, whom you brought among us, came to me to mock and insult me; 18 then as soon as I raised my voice and screamed, he left his robe with me and ran outside [the house].”
Joseph Imprisoned 19 And when Joseph’s master heard the words of his wife, saying, “This is the way your servant treated me,” his anger burned. 20 So Joseph’s master took him and put him in the prison, a place where the king’s prisoners were confined; so he was there in the prison. 21 But the LORD was with Joseph and extended lovingkindness to him, and gave him favor in the sight of the warden. 22 The warden committed to Joseph’s care (management) all the prisoners who were in the prison; so that whatever was done there, he was in charge of it. 23 The warden paid no attention to anything that was in Joseph’s care because the LORD was with him; whatever Joseph did, the LORD made to prosper.

Genesis 40
Joseph Interprets A Dream

1 Now some time later, the cupbearer (butler) and the baker for the king of Egypt offended their lord, Egypt’s king. 2 Pharaoh (Sesostris II) was extremely angry with his two officials, the chief of the cupbearers and the chief of the bakers. 3 He put them in confinement in the house of the captain of the guard, in the same prison where Joseph was confined. 4 The captain of the guard put Joseph in charge of them, and he served them; and they continued to be in custody for some time. 5 Then the cupbearer and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were confined in the prison, both dreamed a dream in the same night, each man with his [own significant] dream and each dream with its [personal] interpretation. 6 When Joseph came to them in the morning and looked at them, [he saw that] they were sad and depressed. 7 So he asked Pharaoh’s officials who were in confinement with him in his master’s house, “Why do you look so down-hearted today?” 8 And they said to him, “We have [each] dreamed [distinct] dreams and there is no one to interpret them.” So Joseph said to them, “Do not interpretations belong to God? Please tell me [your dreams].”
9 So the chief cupbearer told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, “In my dream there was a grapevine in front of me; 10 and on the vine were three branches. Then as soon as it budded, its blossoms burst open, and its clusters produced ripe grapes [in rapid succession]. 11 “Now Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and squeezed them into Pharaoh’s cup; then I placed the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.” 12 Then Joseph said to him, “This is the interpretation of it: the three branches represent three days; 13 within three more days Pharaoh will lift up your head (present you in public) and restore you to your position; and you will [again] put Pharaoh’s cup into his hand just as [you did] when you were his cupbearer. 14 Only think of me when it goes well with you, and please show me kindness by mentioning me to Pharaoh and get me out of this house. 15 “For in fact I was taken (stolen) from the land of the Hebrews by [unlawful] force, and even here I have done nothing for which they should put me in the dungeon.”
16 When the chief baker saw that the interpretation [of the dream] was good, he said to Joseph, “I also dreamed, and [in my dream] there were three cake baskets on my head; 17 and in the top basket there were some of all sorts of baked food for Pharaoh, but the birds [of prey] were eating [these foods] out of the basket on my head.” 18 Joseph answered, “This is the interpretation of it: the three baskets represent three days; 19 within three more days Pharaoh will lift up your head and will hang you on a tree (gallows, pole), and [you will not so much as be given a burial, but] the birds will eat your flesh.”
20 Now on the third day, [which was] the Pharaoh’s birthday, he [released the two men from prison and] made a feast for all his servants; and he lifted up the head of the chief cupbearer and the head of the chief baker [that is, presented them in public] among his servants. 21 He restored the chief cupbearer to his office, and the cupbearer [once again] put the cup into Pharaoh’s hand; 22 but Pharaoh hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had interpreted [the meaning of the dreams] to them. 23 Yet [even after all that] the chief cupbearer did not remember Joseph, but forgot [all about] him.

Genesis 41
Pharaoh’s Dream

1 Now it happened at the end of two full years that Pharaoh dreamed that he was standing by the Nile. 2 And lo, there came up out of the Nile seven [healthy] cows, sleek and handsome and fat; and they grazed in the reed grass [in a marshy pasture]. 3 Then behold, seven other cows came up after them out of the Nile, ugly and gaunt and raw-boned, and stood by the fat cows on the bank of the Nile. 4 Then the ugly and gaunt and raw-boned cows ate up the seven sleek and fat cows. Then Pharaoh awoke. 5 Then he fell asleep and dreamed a second time; and behold, seven ears of grain came up on a single stalk, plump and good. 6 Then behold, seven ears [of grain], thin and dried up by the east wind, sprouted after them. 7 Then the thin ears swallowed the seven plump and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and it was a dream. 8 So when morning came his spirit was troubled and disturbed and he sent and called for all the magicians and all the wise men of Egypt. And Pharaoh told them his dreams, but no one could interpret them to him.

9 Then the chief cupbearer spoke to Pharaoh, saying, “I would mention my faults today. 10 [Two years ago] Pharaoh was angry with his servants, and he put me in confinement in the house of the captain of the guard, both me and the chief baker. 11 We dreamed a dream on the same night, he and I; each of us dreamed according to [the significance of] the interpretation of his own dream. 12 Now there was with us [in the prison] a young man, a Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted our dreams for us, to each man according to the significance of his own dream. 13 “And just as he interpreted [the dreams] for us, so it happened; I was restored to my office [as chief cupbearer], and the baker was hanged.”

Joseph Interprets 14 Then Pharaoh sent and called for Joseph, and they hurriedly brought him out of the dungeon; and when Joseph shaved himself and changed his clothes [making himself presentable], he came to Pharaoh. 15 Pharaoh said to Joseph, “I have dreamed a dream, and there is no one who can interpret it; and I have heard it said about you that you can understand a dream and interpret it.” 16 Joseph answered Pharaoh, “It is not in me [to interpret the dream]; God [not I] will give Pharaoh a favorable answer [through me].” 17 So Pharaoh said to Joseph, “In my dream, I was standing on the bank of the Nile; 18 and seven fat, sleek and handsome cows came up out of the river, and they grazed in the reed grass [of a marshy pasture]. 19 Lo, seven other cows came up after them, very ugly and gaunt [just skin and bones]; such emaciated animals as I have never seen in all the land of Egypt. 20 And the lean and ugly cows ate up the first seven fat cows. 21 Yet when they had devoured them, it could not be detected that they had eaten them, because they were still as thin and emaciated as before. Then I awoke [but again I fell asleep and dreamed]. 22 I saw in my [second] dream, seven ears [of grain], plump and good, growing on a single stalk; 23 and lo, seven [other] ears, withered, thin, and scorched by the east wind, sprouted after them; 24 and the thin ears devoured the seven good ears. Now I told this to the magicians and soothsayers, but there was no one who could explain it [to me].”
25 Then Joseph said to Pharaoh, “The [two] dreams are one [and the same and have one interpretation]; God has shown Pharaoh what He is about to do. 26 The seven good cows are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years; the [two] dreams are one [and the same]. 27 The seven thin and ugly cows that came up after them are seven years; and also the seven thin ears, dried up and scorched by the east wind, they are seven years of famine and hunger. 28 This is the message just as I have told Pharaoh: God has shown Pharaoh what He is about to do. 29 Listen very carefully: seven years of great abundance will come throughout all the land of Egypt; 30 but afterward seven years of famine and hunger will come, and [there will be such desperate need that] all the great abundance [of the previous years] will be forgotten in the land of Egypt [as if it never happened], and famine and destitution will ravage and destroy the land. 31 So the great abundance will become forgotten in the land because of that subsequent famine, for it will be very severe. 32 That the dream was repeated twice to Pharaoh [and in two different ways] indicates that this matter is fully determined and established by God, and God will bring it to pass very quickly. 33 So now let Pharaoh [prepare ahead and] look for a man discerning and clear-headed and wise, and set him [in charge] over the land of Egypt [as governor under Pharaoh]. 34 Let Pharaoh take action to appoint overseers and officials over the land, and set aside one-fifth [of the produce] of the [entire] land of Egypt in the seven years of abundance. 35 Let them gather [as a tax] all [of the fifth of] the food of these good years that are coming, and store up grain under the direction and authority of Pharaoh, and let them guard the food [in fortified granaries] in the cities. 36 “That food shall be put [in storage] as a reserve for the land against the seven years of famine and hunger which will occur in the land of Egypt, so that the land (people) will not be ravaged during the famine.”
37 Now the plan seemed good to Pharaoh and to all of his servants. Joseph Is Made a Ruler of Egypt 38 So Pharaoh said to his servants, “Can we find a man like this [a man equal to Joseph], in whom is the divine spirit [of God]?” 39 Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Since [your] God has shown you all this, there is no one as discerning and clear-headed and wise as you are. 40 “You shall have charge over my house, and all my people shall be governed according to your word and pay respect [to you with reverence, submission, and obedience]; only in [matters of] the throne will I be greater than you [in Egypt].” 41 Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “See, I have set you [in charge] over all the land of Egypt.” 42 Then Pharaoh took off his signet ring from his hand and put it on Joseph’s hand, and dressed him in [official] vestments of fine linen and put a gold chain around his neck. 43 He had him ride in his second chariot; and runners proclaimed before him, “[Attention,] bow the knee!” And he set him over all the land of Egypt. 44 Moreover, Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Though I am Pharaoh, yet without your permission shall no man raise his hand [to do anything] or set his foot [to go anywhere] in all the land of Egypt [all classes of people shall submit to your authority].” 45 Then Pharaoh named Joseph Zaphenath-paneah; and he gave him Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On (Heliopolis in Egypt), as his wife. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt [to inspect and govern it].
46 Now Joseph [had been in Egypt thirteen years and] was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. Joseph departed from the presence of Pharaoh and went through all the land of Egypt [performing his duties]. 47 In the seven abundant years the earth produced handfuls [for each seed planted]. 48 And Joseph gathered all the [surplus] food of the seven [good] years in the land of Egypt and stored [enormous quantities of] the food in the cities. He stored away in every city the food [collected] from its own surrounding fields. 49 Thus Joseph gathered and stored up grain in great abundance like the sand of the sea, until he stopped counting it, for it could not be measured.
The Sons of Joseph 50 Now two sons were born to Joseph before the years of famine came, whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, bore to him. 51 Joseph named the firstborn Manasseh (causing to forget), for he said, “God has made me forget all my trouble and hardship and all [the sorrow of the loss of] my father’s household.” 52 He named the second [son] Ephraim (fruitfulness), for “God has caused me to be fruitful and very successful in the land of my suffering.”

53 When the seven years of plenty came to an end in the land of Egypt, 54 the seven years of famine began to come, just as Joseph had said [they would]; the famine was in all the [surrounding] lands, but in the land of Egypt there was bread (food). 55 So when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried out to Pharaoh for food; and Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, “Go to Joseph; do whatever he says to you.” 56 When the famine was spread over all the land, Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold [surplus grain] to the Egyptians; and the famine grew [extremely] severe in the land of Egypt. 57 And [the people of] all countries came to Egypt to Joseph to buy grain, because the famine was severe over all the [known] earth.

Genesis 42
Joseph’s Brothers Sent To Egypt

1Now when Jacob (Israel) learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons, “Why are you staring at one another [in bewilderment and not taking action]?” 2He said, “I have heard that there is grain in Egypt; go down there and buy [some] grain for us, so that we may live and not die [of starvation].” 3So ten of Joseph’s brothers went down to buy grain in Egypt. 4But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph’s [younger] brother, with his brothers, for he said, “I am afraid that some harm or injury may come to him.” 5So the sons of Israel came [to Egypt] to buy grain along with the others who were coming, for famine was in the land of Canaan also.

6Now Joseph was the ruler over the land, and he was the one who sold [grain] to all the people of the land; and Joseph’s [half] brothers came and bowed down before him with their faces to the ground. 7When Joseph saw his brothers he recognized them, but [hiding his identity] he treated them as strangers and spoke harshly to them. He said to them, “Where have you come from?” And they said, “From the land of Canaan, to buy food.”

8Joseph recognized his brothers, but they did not recognize him. 9Joseph remembered the dreams he had dreamed about them, and said to them, “You are spies; you have come [with a malicious purpose] to observe the undefended parts of our land.” 10But they said to him, “No, my lord, for your servants have [only] come to buy food. 11“We are all the sons of one man; we are honest men, your servants are not spies.” 12Yet he said to them, “No, you have come to see the undefended parts of our land.” 13But they said, “Your servants are twelve brothers [in all], the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; please listen: the youngest is with our father today, and one is no longer alive.” 14Joseph said to them, “It is as I said to you, you are spies. 15In this way you shall be tested: by the life of Pharaoh, you shall not leave this place unless your youngest brother comes here! 16“Send one of you [back home], and let him bring your brother [here], while [the rest of] you remain confined, so that your words may be tested, [to see] whether there is any truth in you [and your story]; or else, by the life of Pharaoh, certainly you are spies.” 17Then Joseph put them all in prison for three days.

18Now Joseph said to them on the third day, “Do this and [you may] live, for I fear God: 19if you are honest men, let one of your brothers be confined in your [place here in] prison; but as for the rest of you, go, carry grain for the famine in your households, 20but bring your youngest brother to me, so your words will be verified and you will not die.” And they did so. 21And they said to one another, “Truly we are guilty regarding our brother [Joseph], because we saw the distress and anguish of his soul when he pleaded with us [to let him go], yet we would not listen [to his cry]; so this distress and anguish has come on us.” 22Reuben answered them, “Did I not tell you, ‘Do not sin against the boy’; and you would not listen? Now the accounting for his blood is required [of us for we are guilty of his death].” 23They did not know that Joseph understood [their conversation], because he spoke to them through an interpreter. 24He turned away from his brothers and [left the room and] wept; then he returned and talked with them, and took Simeon from them and bound him in front of them [to be kept as a hostage in Egypt]. 25Then Joseph gave orders [privately] that their bags be filled with grain, and that every man’s money [used to pay for the grain] be put back in his sack, and that provisions be given to them for the journey. And so this was done for them.

26They loaded their donkeys with grain and left from there. 27And at the lodging place, as one of them opened his sack to feed his donkey, he saw his money in the opening of his sack. 28And he said to his brothers, “My money has been returned! Here it is in my sack!” And their hearts sank, and they were afraid and turned trembling to one another, saying, “What is this that God has done to us?”

The Return to Canaan 29When they came to Jacob their father in the land of Canaan, they told him everything that had happened to them, saying, 30“The man who is the lord of the land spoke harshly to us, and took us for spies of the land. 31But we told him, ‘We are honest men; we are not spies. 32‘We are twelve brothers, sons of our father; one is no longer alive, and the youngest is with our father today in the land of Canaan.’ 33And the man, the lord of the country, said to us, ‘By this [test] I will know that you are honest men: leave one of your brothers here with me and take grain for your starving households and go. 34‘Bring your youngest brother to me; then I will know that you are not spies, but that you are honest men. Then I will return your [imprisoned] brother [back] to you, and you may trade and do business in the land.’”

35Now when they emptied their sacks, every man’s bundle of money [paid to buy grain] was in his sack. When they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid. 36Jacob their father said to them, “You have bereaved me [by causing the loss] of my children. Joseph is no more, and Simeon is no more, and you would take Benjamin [from me]. All these things are [working] against me.” 37Then Reuben spoke to his father, “You may put my two sons to death if I do not bring Benjamin back to you; put him in my care, and I will return him to you.” 38But Jacob said, “My son shall not go down [to Egypt] with you; for his brother is dead, and he alone is left [of Rachel’s children]. If any harm or accident should happen to him on the journey you are taking, then you will bring my gray hair down to Sheol (the place of the dead) in sorrow.”

Genesis 43
The Return To Egypt

1Now the famine was very severe in the land [of Canaan]. 2And it happened that when the families of Jacob’s sons had finished eating [all of] the grain which they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them, “Go again, buy us a little food.” 3But Judah said to him, “The man [representing Pharaoh] solemnly and sternly warned us, saying, ‘You will not see my face [again] unless your brother is with you.’ 4If you will send our brother with us, we will go down [to Egypt] and buy you food. 5“But if you will not send him, we will not go down there; for the man said to us, ‘You will not see my face unless your brother is with you.’” 6And Israel (Jacob) said, “Why did you treat me so badly by telling the man that you had another brother?” 7And they said, “The man asked us straightforward questions about ourselves and our relatives. He said, ‘Is your father still alive? Have you another brother?’ And we answered him accordingly. How could we possibly know that he would say, ‘Bring your brother down [here to Egypt]’?” 8Judah said to Israel his father, “Send the young man with me and we will get up and go [buy food], so that we may live and not die [of starvation], we as well as you and our little ones. 9I will be security (a guarantee) for him; you may hold me [personally] responsible for him. If I do not bring him [back] to you and place him [safely] before you, then let me bear the blame before you forever. 10“For if we had not delayed like this, surely by now we would have returned the second time.”

11Then their father Israel said to them, “If it must be so, then do this; take some of the choicest products of the land in your sacks, and carry it as a present [of tribute] to the man [representing Pharaoh], a little balm and a little honey, aromatic spices or gum, resin, pistachio nuts, and almonds. 12Take double the [amount of] money with you, and take back the money that was returned in the opening of your sacks; perhaps it was an oversight. 13Take your brother [Benjamin] also, and get up, and go to the man; 14and may God Almighty grant you compassion and favor before the man, so that he will release to you your other brother [Simeon] and Benjamin. And as for me, if I am bereaved of my children [Joseph, Simeon, and Benjamin], I am bereaved.” 15Then the men took the present, and they took double the [amount of] money with them, and Benjamin; then they left and went down to Egypt and stood before Joseph.

Joseph Sees Benjamin 16When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of his house, “Bring the men into the house, and kill an animal and make [a meal] ready; for the men will dine with me at noon.” 17So the man did as Joseph said, and brought the men to Joseph’s house. 18The men were afraid, because they were brought to Joseph’s house; and [expecting the worst] they said, “It is because of the money that was returned in our sacks the first time [we came] that we are being brought in, so that he may find a reason to accuse us and assail us, and take us as slaves, and seize our donkeys.” 19So they approached the steward of Joseph’s house, and talked with him at the entrance of the house, 20and said, “Oh, my lord, we indeed came down here the first time to buy food; 21and when we arrived at the inn [after leaving here], we opened our sacks and there was each man’s money [with which he had paid for grain], in full, returned in the mouth of his sack. So we have brought it back [this time]. 22“We have also brought down with us additional money to buy food; we do not know who put our money [back] in our sacks [last time].” 23But the steward [encouraged them and] said, “Peace be to you, do not be afraid; your God and the God of your father has [miraculously] given you treasure in your sacks. I [already] had your money [which you paid to us].” Then he brought Simeon out to them. 24Then the steward brought the men into Joseph’s house and gave them water, and they washed [the dust off] their feet; and he gave their donkeys feed. 25So they prepared the present [of tribute] for Joseph before his arrival at noon; for they had heard that they were to eat a meal there.

26When Joseph came home, they brought into the house to him the present [of tribute] which they had with them and bowed to the ground before him. 27He asked them about their well-being, and said, “Is your old father well, of whom you spoke? Is he still alive?” 28And they answered, “Your servant our father is in good health; he is still alive.” And they bowed down [their heads before Joseph] in respect. 29And he looked up and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother’s [only other] son, and said, “Is this your youngest brother, of whom you spoke to me?” And Joseph said, “God be gracious to you and show you favor, my son.” 30Then Joseph hurried out [of the room] because his heart was deeply touched over his brother, and he sought privacy to weep; so he entered his chamber and wept there. 31Then he washed his face and came out, and, restraining himself, said, “Let the meal be served.” 32So the servants served Joseph by himself [in honor of his rank], and his brothers by themselves, and the Egyptians who ate with him by themselves, because [according to custom] the Egyptians could not eat food with the Hebrews, for that is loathsome to the Egyptians. 33Now Joseph’s brothers were seated [by the steward] before him [in the order of their birth]—the firstborn according to his birthright and the youngest according to his youth; and the men looked at one another in astonishment [because so much was known about them]. 34Joseph selected and sent portions to them from his own table, but Benjamin’s portion was five times as much as any of theirs. So they feasted and drank freely and celebrated with him.

Genesis 44
The Brothers Are Brought Back

1And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, “Fill the men’s sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man’s [grain] money in the mouth of the sack. 2“Put my [personal] cup, the silver cup, in the mouth of the sack of the youngest, with his grain money.” And the steward did as Joseph had told him. 3As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their donkeys. 4When they had left the city, and were not yet far away, Joseph said to his steward, “Get up, follow after the men; and when you overtake them, say to them, ‘Why have you repaid evil [to us] for good [paid to you]? 5‘Is this not my lord’s drinking cup and the one which he uses for divination? You have done [a great and unforgivable] wrong in doing this.’”

6So the steward overtook them and he said these words to them. 7They said to him, “Why does my lord speak these things? Far be it from your servants to do such a thing! 8Please remember, the money which we found in the mouths of our sacks we have brought back to you from the land of Canaan. Is it likely then that we would steal silver or gold from your master’s house? 9“With whomever of your servants your master’s cup is found, let him die, and the rest of us will be my lord’s slaves.” 10And the steward said, “Now let it be as you say; he with whom the cup is found will be my slave, but the rest of you shall be blameless.” 11Then every man quickly lowered his sack to the ground and each man opened his sack [confident the cup would not be found among them]. 12The steward searched, beginning with the eldest and ending with the youngest, and the cup was found in Benjamin’s sack. 13Then they tore their clothes [in grief]; and after each man had loaded his donkey again, they returned to the city.

14When Judah and his brothers came to Joseph’s house, he was still there; and they fell to the ground before him. 15Joseph spoke harshly to them, “What is this thing that you have done? Do you not realize that such a man as I can indeed practice divination and foretell [everything you do without outside knowledge of it]?” 16So Judah said, “What can we say to my lord? What can we reply? Or how can we clear ourselves, since God has exposed the sin and guilt of your servants? Behold, we are my lord’s slaves, the rest of us as well as he with whom the cup is found.” 17But Joseph said, “Far be it from me that I should do that; but the man in whose hand the cup has been found, he will be my servant; and as for [the rest of] you, get up and go in peace to your father.”

18Then Judah approached him, and said, “O my lord, please let your servant say a word to you in private, and do not let your anger blaze against your servant, for you are equal to Pharaoh [so I speak as if directly to him]. 19My lord asked his servants, saying, ‘Have you a father or a brother?’ 20We said to my lord, ‘We have an old father and a young [brother, Benjamin, the] child of his old age. Now his brother [Joseph] is dead, and he alone is left of [the two sons born of] his mother, and his father loves him.’ 21Then you said to your servants, ‘Bring him down to me that I may actually see him.’ 22But we said to my lord, ‘The young man cannot leave his father, for if he should leave his father, his father would die.’ 23You said to your servants, ‘Unless your youngest brother comes with you, you shall not see my face again.’ 24So when we went back to your servant my father, we told him what my lord had said. 25Our father said, ‘Go back [to Egypt], and buy us a little food.’ 26But we said, ‘We cannot go down [to Egypt]. If our youngest brother is with us, then we will go down [there]; for we [were sternly told that we] cannot see the man’s face unless our youngest brother is with us.’ 27Your servant my father said to us, ‘You know that my wife [Rachel] bore me [only] two sons. 28‘And one [son] went out from me, and I said, “Surely he is torn to pieces,” and I have not seen him since. 29‘If you take this one also from me, and harm or an accident happens to him, you will bring my gray hair down to Sheol in sorrow.’ 30Now, therefore, when I come to your servant my father, and the young man is not with us, since his life is bound up in the young man’s life, 31when he sees that the young man is not with us, he will die; and your servants will bring the gray hair of your servant our father down to Sheol in [great] sorrow. 32For your servant became security for the young man to my father, saying, ‘If I do not bring him back to you, then let me bear the blame before my father forever.’ 33Now, therefore, please let your servant (Judah) remain here instead of the youth [to be] a slave to my lord, and let the young man go home with his brothers. 34“How can I go up to my father if the young man is not with me—for fear that I would see the tragedy that would overtake my [elderly] father [if Benjamin does not return]?”

Genesis 45
Joseph Shows Kindness To His Brothers

1Then Joseph could not control himself [any longer] in front of all those who attended him, and he called out, “Have everyone leave me.” So no man stood there when Joseph revealed himself to his brothers. 2Joseph wept aloud, and the Egyptians [who had just left him] heard it, and the household of Pharaoh heard of it. 3Then Joseph said to his brothers, “I am Joseph! Is my father still alive?” But his brothers were speechless, for they were stunned and dismayed by [the fact that they were in] Joseph’s presence.

4And Joseph said to his brothers, “Please come closer to me.” And they approached him. And he said, “I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. 5Now do not be distressed or angry with yourselves because you sold me here, for God sent me ahead of you to save life and preserve our family. 6For the famine has been in the land these two years, and there are still five more years in which there will be no plowing and harvesting. 7God sent me [to Egypt] ahead of you to preserve for you a remnant on the earth, and to keep you alive by a great escape. 8So now it was not you who sent me here, but God; and He has made me a father to Pharaoh and lord of all his household and ruler over all the land of Egypt. 9Hurry and go up to my father, and tell him, ‘Your son Joseph says this to you: God has made me lord of all Egypt; come down to me, do not delay. 10You shall live in the land of Goshen [the best pasture land of Egypt], and you shall be close to me—you and your children and your grandchildren, your flocks and your herds and all you have. 11“There I will provide for you and sustain you, so that you and your household and all that are yours may not become impoverished, for there are still five years of famine to come.”’ 12Look! Your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin see, that I am speaking to you [personally in your language and not through an interpreter]. 13“Now you must tell my father of all my splendor and power in Egypt, and of everything that you have seen; and you must hurry and bring my father down here.” 14Then he embraced his brother Benjamin’s neck and wept, and Benjamin wept on his neck. 15He kissed all his brothers and wept on them, and afterward his brothers talked with him.

16When the news was heard in Pharaoh’s house that Joseph’s brothers had come, it pleased Pharaoh and his servants. 17Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Tell your brothers, ‘Do this: load your animals and return to the land of Canaan [without delay], 18and get your father and your households and come to me. I will give you the best of the land of Egypt and you will eat the fat (the finest produce) of the land.’ 19Now you [brothers of Joseph] are ordered [by Pharaoh], ‘Do this: take wagons from the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives, and bring your father and come. 20‘Do not be concerned with your goods, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.’”

21Then the sons of Israel did so; and Joseph gave them wagons according to the command of Pharaoh, and gave them provisions for the journey. 22To each of them Joseph gave changes of clothing, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver and five changes of clothing. 23To his father he sent the following: ten male donkeys loaded with the good things of Egypt, and ten female donkeys loaded with grain and bread and provision for his father [to supply all who were with him] on the journey.

24So he sent his brothers away, and as they departed, he said to them, “See that you do not quarrel on the journey [about how to explain this to our father].” 25So they went up from Egypt, and came to the land of Canaan to Jacob their father, 26and they said to him, “Joseph is still alive, and indeed he is ruler over all the land of Egypt.” But Jacob was stunned and his heart almost stopped beating, because he did not believe them. 27When they told him everything that Joseph had said to them, and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of their father Jacob revived. 28And Israel (Jacob) said, “It is enough! Joseph my son is still alive. I will go and see him before I die.”

Genesis 46
Jacob Moves To Egypt

1So Israel set out with all that he had, and came to Beersheba [where both his father and grandfather had worshiped God], and offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. 2And God spoke to Israel in visions of the night and said, “Jacob, Jacob!” And he said, “Here I am.” 3And He said, “I am God, the God of your father; do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make you (your descendants) a great nation there. 4“I will go down with you to Egypt, and I will also surely bring you (your people) up again; and Joseph will put his hand on your eyes [to close them at the time of your death].”

5So Jacob set out from Beersheba; and the sons of Israel carried their father Jacob and their children and their wives in the wagons that Pharaoh had sent to carry him. 6And they took their livestock and the possessions which they had acquired in the land of Canaan and came to Egypt, Jacob and all his descendants with him. 7His sons and his grandsons, his daughters and his granddaughters, and all his descendants he brought with him to Egypt.

Those Who Came to Egypt 8Now these are the names of the sons of Israel, Jacob and his sons, who went to Egypt: Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn. 9The sons of Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 10The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman. 11The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 12The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah—but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul. 13The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puvah, Job, and Shimron. 14The sons of Zebulun: Sered, Elon, and Jahleel. 15These are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram, with his daughter Dinah; all of his sons and daughters numbered thirty-three. 16The sons of Gad: Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi, and Areli. 17The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and Serah their sister. And the sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel. 18These are the sons of Zilpah, [the maid] whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter [when she married Jacob]; and she bore to Jacob these sixteen persons [two sons and fourteen grandchildren]. 19The sons of Rachel, Jacob’s wife: Joseph and Benjamin. 20Now to Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, priest of On (Heliopolis in Egypt), bore to him. 21And the sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard. 22These are the sons of Rachel, who were born to Jacob; [there were] fourteen persons in all [two sons and twelve grandchildren]. 23The son of Dan: Hushim. 24The sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem. 25These are the sons of Bilhah, [the maid] whom Laban gave to Rachel his daughter [when she married Jacob]. And she bore these to Jacob; [there were] seven persons in all [two sons and five grandchildren]. 26All the persons who came with Jacob into Egypt—who were his direct descendants, not counting the wives of [Jacob or] Jacob’s sons, were sixty-six persons in all, 27and the sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two. All the persons of the house of Jacob [including Jacob, and Joseph and his sons], who came into Egypt, were seventy.

28Now Jacob (Israel) sent Judah ahead of him to Joseph, to direct him to Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen. 29Then Joseph prepared his chariot and went up to meet Israel his father in Goshen; as soon as he presented himself before him (authenticating his identity), he fell on his [father’s] neck and wept on his neck a [very] long time. 30And Israel said to Joseph, “Now let me die [in peace], since I have seen your face [and know] that you are still alive.” 31Joseph said to his brothers and to his father’s household, “I will go up and tell Pharaoh, and say to him, ‘My brothers and my father’s household, who were in the land of Canaan, have come to me; 32and the men are shepherds, for they have been keepers of livestock; and they have brought their flocks and their herds and all that they have.’ 33And it shall be that when Pharaoh calls you and says, ‘What is your occupation?’ 34you shall say, ‘Your servants have been keepers of livestock from our youth until now, both we and our fathers [before us],’ in order that you may live [separately and securely] in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is repulsive to the Egyptians.”

Genesis 47
Jacob’s Family Settles In Goshen

1Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, “My father and my brothers, with their flocks and their herds and all that they own, have come from the land of Canaan, and they are in the land of Goshen.” 2He took five men from among his brothers and presented them to Pharaoh. 3And Pharaoh said to his brothers [as Joseph expected], “What is your occupation?” And they said to Pharaoh, “Your servants are shepherds, both we and our fathers [before us].” 4Moreover, they said to Pharaoh, “We have come to live temporarily (sojourn) in the land [of Egypt], for there is no pasture for the flocks of your servants [in our land], for the famine is very severe in Canaan. So now, please let your servants live in the land of Goshen.” 5Then Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, “Your father and your brothers have come to you. 6“The land of Egypt is before you; settle your father and your brothers in the best of the land. Let them live in the land of Goshen; and if you know of any men of ability among them, put them in charge of my livestock.”

7Then Joseph brought Jacob (Israel) his father and presented him before Pharaoh; and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. 8And Pharaoh asked Jacob, “How old are you?” 9Jacob said to Pharaoh, “The years of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty. Few and unpleasant have been the years of my life, and they have not reached the years that my fathers lived during the days of their pilgrimage.” 10And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and departed from his presence. 11So Joseph settled his father and brothers and gave them a possession in Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses (Goshen), as Pharaoh commanded. 12Joseph provided and supplied his father and his brothers and all his father’s household with food, according to [the needs of] their children.

13Now [in the course of time] there was no food in all the land, for the famine was distressingly severe, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan languished [in destitution and starvation] because of the famine. 14Joseph gathered all the money that was found in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan [in payment] for the grain which they bought, and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh’s house. 15And when the money was exhausted in the land of Egypt and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph and said, “Give us food! Why should we die before your very eyes? For our money is gone.” 16Joseph said, “Give up your livestock, and I will give you food in exchange for your livestock, since the money is gone.” 17So they brought their livestock to Joseph, and he gave them food in exchange for the horses and the flocks and the herds and the donkeys; and he supplied them with food in exchange for all their livestock that year. 18When that year was ended, they came to him the next year and said to him, “We will not hide from my lord [the fact] that our money is spent; my lord also has our herds of livestock; there is nothing left in the sight of my lord but our bodies and our lands. 19“Why should we die before your eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land in exchange for food, and we and our land will be servants to Pharaoh. And give us seed [to plant], that we may live and not die, and that the land may not be desolate.”

Result of the Famine 20So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for every Egyptian sold his field because the famine was severe upon them. So the land became Pharaoh’s. 21And as for the people, he relocated them [temporarily] to cities from one end of Egypt’s border to the other. 22Only the land of the priests he did not buy, for the priests had an allotment from Pharaoh, and they lived on the amount which Pharaoh gave them, so they did not sell their land. 23Then Joseph said to the people, “Look, today I have bought you and your land for Pharaoh; now, here is seed for you, and you shall plant the land. 24“At harvest time [when you reap the increase] you shall give one-fifth of it to Pharaoh, and four-fifths will be your own to use for seed for the field and as food for you and those of your households and for your little ones.” 25And they said, “You have saved our lives! Let us find favor in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh’s servants.” 26And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt—valid to this day—that Pharaoh should have the fifth part [of the crops]; only the land of the priests did not become Pharaoh’s.

27Now [the people of] Israel lived in the country of Egypt, in [the land of] Goshen, and they gained possessions and acquired property there and were fruitful and multiplied greatly. 28And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years; so the length of Jacob’s life was a hundred and forty-seven years.

29And when the time drew near for Israel to die, he called his son Joseph and said to him, “If now I have found favor in your sight, please put your hand under my thigh and [promise to] deal loyally and faithfully with me. Please do not bury me in Egypt, 30but when I lie down with my fathers [in death], you will carry me out of Egypt and bury me in their burial place [at Hebron in the cave of Machpelah].” And Joseph said, “I will do as you have directed.” 31Then he said, “Swear to me [that you will do it].” So he swore to him. Then Israel (Jacob) bowed in worship at the head of the bed.

Genesis 48
Israel’s Last Days

1Now some time after these things happened, Joseph was told, “Your father is sick.” So he took his two sons Manasseh and Ephraim with him [to go to Goshen]. 2And when Jacob (Israel) was told, “Look now, your son Joseph has come to you,” Israel strengthened himself and sat up on the bed. 3Then Jacob said to Joseph, “God Almighty appeared to me at Luz (Bethel) in the land of Canaan and blessed me, 4and said to me, ‘Behold, I will make you fruitful and numerous, and I will make you a great company of people, and will give this land to your descendants after you as an everlasting possession.’ 5Now your two sons [Ephraim and Manasseh], who were born to you in the land of Egypt before I came to you in Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine [that is, adopted as my heirs and sons as surely], as Reuben and Simeon are my sons. 6But other sons who were born to you after them shall be your own; they shall be called by the names of their [two] brothers in their inheritance. 7“Now as for me, when I came from Paddan [in Mesopotamia], Rachel died beside me in the land of Canaan on the journey, when there was still some distance to go to Ephrath; and I buried her there on the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem).”

8When Israel [who was almost blind] saw Joseph’s sons, he said, “Who are these?” 9Joseph said to his father, “They are my sons, whom God has given me here [in Egypt].” So he said, “Please bring them to me, so that I may bless them.” 10Now Israel’s eyes were so dim from age that he could not see [clearly]. Then Joseph brought them close to him, and he kissed and embraced them. 11Israel said to Joseph, “I never expected to see your face, but see, God has shown me your children as well.” 12Then Joseph took the boys [from his father’s embrace], and he bowed [before him] with his face to the ground. 13Then Joseph took them both, Ephraim with his right hand toward Israel’s left, and Manasseh with his left hand toward Israel’s right, and brought them close to him. 14But Israel reached out his right hand and laid it on the head of Ephraim, who was the younger, and his left hand on Manasseh’s head, crossing his hands [intentionally], even though Manasseh was the firstborn. 15Then Jacob (Israel) blessed Joseph, and said,
“The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked [in faithful obedience],
The God who has been my Shepherd [leading and caring for me] all my life to this day,
16The Angel [that is, the LORD Himself] who has redeemed me [continually] from all evil,
Bless the boys;
And may my name live on in them [may they be worthy of having their names linked with mine],
And the names of my fathers Abraham and Isaac;
And may they grow into a [great] multitude in the midst of the earth.”

17When Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand on Ephraim’s head, it displeased him [because he was not the firstborn]; and he grasped his father’s hand to move it from Ephraim’s head to Manasseh’s head. 18Joseph said to his father, “Not so, my father, for this is the firstborn; place your right hand on Manasseh’s head.” 19But his father refused and said, “I know, my son, I know; Manasseh also will become a people and he will be great; but his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his descendants shall become a multitude of nations.” 20Then Jacob blessed them that day, saying,
“By you Israel will pronounce a blessing, saying,
‘May God make you like Ephraim and Manasseh.’”
And he put Ephraim before Manasseh. 21Then Israel said to Joseph, “Behold, I am about to die, but God will be with you, and bring you back to [Canaan] the land of your fathers. 22“Moreover, I have given you [the birthright,] one portion [Shechem, one mountain ridge] more than any of your brothers, which I took [reclaiming it] from the hand of the Amorites with my sword and with my bow.”

Genesis 49
Israel’s Prophecy Concerning His Sons

1Then Jacob called for his sons and said, “Assemble yourselves [around me] that I may tell you what will happen to you and your descendants in the days to come.
2“Gather together and hear, O sons of Jacob;
And listen to Israel (Jacob) your father.
3“Reuben, you are my firstborn;
My might, the beginning of my strength and vigor,
Preeminent in dignity and preeminent in power [that should have been your birthright].
4“But unstable and reckless and boiling over like water [in sinful lust], you shall not excel or have the preeminence [of the firstborn],
Because you went up to your father’s bed [with Bilhah];
You defiled it—he went up to my couch.
5“Simeon and Levi are brothers [equally headstrong, deceitful, vindictive, and cruel];
Their swords are weapons of violence and revenge.
6“O my soul, do not come into their secret council;
Let not my glory (honor) be united with their assembly [for I knew nothing of their plot];
Because in their anger they killed men [an honored man, Shechem, and the Shechemites],
And in their self-will they lamed oxen.
7“Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce;
And their wrath, for it was cruel.
I will divide and disperse them in Jacob,
And scatter them in [the midst of the land of] Israel.
8“Judah, you are the one whom your brothers shall praise;
Your hand will be on the neck of your enemies;
Your father’s sons shall bow down to you.
9“Judah, a lion’s cub;
With the prey, my son, you have gone high up [the mountain].
He stooped down, he crouched like a lion,
And like a lion—who dares rouse him?
10“The scepter [of royalty] shall not depart from Judah,
Nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet,
Until Shiloh [the Messiah, the Peaceful One] comes,
And to Him shall be the obedience of the peoples.
11“Tying his foal to the [strong] vine
And his donkey’s colt to the choice vine,
He washes his clothing in wine [because the grapevine produces abundantly],
And his robes in the blood of grapes.
12“His eyes are darker and sparkle more than wine,
And his teeth whiter than milk.
13“Zebulun shall dwell at the seashore;
And he shall be a haven (landing place) for ships,
And his flank shall be toward Sidon.
14“Issachar is [like] a strong-boned donkey,
Crouching down between the sheepfolds.
15“When he saw that the resting place was good
And that the land was pleasant,
He bowed his shoulder to bear [burdens],
And became a servant at forced labor.
16“Dan shall judge his people,
As one of the tribes of Israel.
17“Dan shall be a [venomous] serpent in the way,
A fanged snake in the path,
That bites the horse’s heels,
So that his rider falls backward.
18“I wait for Your salvation, O LORD.
19“As for Gad—a raiding troop shall raid him,
But he shall raid at their heels and assault them [victoriously].
20“Asher’s food [supply] shall be rich and bountiful,
And he shall yield and deliver royal delights.
21“Naphtali is a doe let loose, [a swift warrior,]
Which yields branched antlers (eloquent words).
22“Joseph is a fruitful bough (a main branch of the vine),
A fruitful bough by a spring (a well, a fountain);
Its branches run over the wall [influencing others].
23“The [skilled] archers have bitterly attacked and provoked him;
They have shot [at him] and harassed him.
24“But his bow remained firm and steady [in the Strength that does not fail],
For his arms were made strong and agile
By the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob,
(By the name of the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel),
25By the God of your father who will help you,
And by the Almighty who blesses you
With blessings of the heavens above,
Blessings lying in the deep that couches beneath,
Blessings of the [nursing] breasts and of the [fertile] womb.
26“The blessings of your father
Are greater than the blessings of my ancestors [Abraham and Isaac]
Up to the utmost bound of the everlasting hills;
They shall be on the head of Joseph,
Even on the crown of the head of him who was the distinguished one and the one who is prince among (separate from) his brothers.
27“Benjamin is a ravenous wolf;
In the morning he devours the prey,
And at night he divides the spoil.”

28All these are the [beginnings of the] twelve tribes of Israel, and this is what their father said to them as he blessed them, blessing each one according to the blessing appropriate to him. 29He charged them and said to them, “I am to be gathered to my people; bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite, 30in the cave in the field at Machpelah, east of Mamre, in the land of Canaan, that Abraham bought, along with the field from Ephron the Hittite, to possess as a burial site. 31There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife, there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife, and there I buried Leah— 32the field and the cave that is in it was purchased from the sons of Heth.” 33When Jacob (Israel) had finished commanding his sons, he drew his feet into the bed and breathed his last, and was gathered to his people [who had preceded him in death].

Genesis 50
Burial Preparations And Mourning For Jacob

1Then Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept over him and kissed him [tenderly]. 2Then Joseph ordered his servants the physicians to embalm (mummify) his father. So the physicians embalmed Israel (Jacob). 3Now forty days were required for this, for that is the customary number of days [of preparation] required for embalming. And the Egyptians wept and grieved for him [in public mourning as they would for royalty] for seventy days.

4When the days of weeping and public mourning for him were past, Joseph spoke to [the nobles of] the house of Pharaoh, saying, “If now I have found favor in your sight, please speak to Pharaoh, saying, 5‘My father made me swear [an oath], saying, “Hear me, I am about to die; bury me in my tomb which I prepared for myself in the land of Canaan.” So now let me go up [to Canaan], please, and bury my father; then I will return.’” 6And Pharaoh said, “Go up and bury your father, as he made you swear.”

7So Joseph went up [to Canaan] to bury his father, and with him went all the officials of Pharaoh, [the nobles of his court and] the elders of his household and all [the nobles and] the elders of the land of Egypt— 8and all the household of Joseph and his brothers and his father’s household. They left only their little ones and their flocks and herds in the land of Goshen. 9Both chariots and horsemen also went up [to Canaan] with Joseph; and it was a very great company. 10When they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan, they mourned there with a great lamentation (expressions of mourning for the deceased) and [extreme demonstrations of] sorrow [according to Egyptian custom]; and Joseph observed a seven-day mourning for his father. 11When the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, they said, “This is a grievous mourning for the Egyptians.” Therefore the place was named Abel-mizraim (mourning of Egypt); it is west of the Jordan. Burial at Machpelah 12So Jacob’s sons did for him as he had commanded them; 13for his sons carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, east of Mamre, which Abraham bought along with the field as a burial site from Ephron the Hittite. 14After he had buried his father, Joseph returned to Egypt, he and his brothers, and all who had gone up with him.

15When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, “What if Joseph carries a grudge against us and pays us back in full for all the wrong which we did to him?” 16So they sent word to Joseph, saying, “Your father commanded us before he died, saying, 17‘You are to say to Joseph, “I beg you, please forgive the transgression of your brothers and their sin, for they did you wrong.”’ Now, please forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of your father.” And Joseph wept when they spoke to him. 18Then his brothers went and fell down before him [in confession]; then they said, “Behold, we are your servants (slaves).” 19But Joseph said to them, “Do not be afraid, for am I in the place of God? [Vengeance is His, not mine.] 20As for you, you meant evil against me, but God meant it for good in order to bring about this present outcome, that many people would be kept alive [as they are this day]. 21“So now, do not be afraid; I will provide for you and support you and your little ones.” So he comforted them [giving them encouragement and hope] and spoke [with kindness] to their hearts.

Death of Joseph 22Now Joseph lived in Egypt, he and his father’s household, and Joseph lived a hundred and ten years. 23Joseph saw the third generation of Ephraim’s children; also the children of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were born and raised on Joseph’s knees. 24Joseph said to his brothers, “I am about to die, but God will surely take care of you and bring you up out of this land to the land which He promised to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob [to give you].” 25Then Joseph made the sons of Israel (Jacob) swear [an oath], saying, “God will surely visit you and take care of you [returning you to Canaan], and [when that happens] you shall carry my bones up from here.” 26So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten years old; and they embalmed him and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.

Exodus 1
Israel Multiplies In Egypt

1Now these are the names of the sons of Israel who came to Egypt with Jacob; each came with his household: 2Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah; 3Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin; 4Dan and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. 5All the descendants of Jacob were seventy people; Joseph was [already] in Egypt. 6Then Joseph died, and all his brothers and all that generation, 7but the Israelites were prolific and increased greatly; they multiplied and became extremely strong, so that the land was filled with them.

8Now a new king arose over Egypt, who did not know Joseph [nor the history of his accomplishments]. 9He said to his people, “Behold, the people of the sons of Israel are too many and too mighty for us [they greatly outnumber us]. 10“Come, let us deal shrewdly with them, so that they will not multiply and in the event of war, join our enemies, and fight against us and escape from the land.” 11So they set taskmasters over them to oppress them with hard labor. And the sons of Israel built Pithom and Raamses as storage cities for Pharaoh. 12But the more the Egyptians oppressed them, the more they multiplied and expanded, so that the Egyptians dreaded and were exasperated by the Israelites. 13And the Egyptians made the Israelites serve rigorously [forcing them into severe slavery]. 14They made their lives bitter with hard labor in mortar, brick, and all kinds of field work. All their labor was harsh and severe.

15Then the king of Egypt said to the Hebrew midwives, one of whom was named Shiphrah (beauty) and the other named Puah (splendor), 16“When you act as midwives to the Hebrew women and see them on the birthstool, if it is a son, you shall kill him; but if it is a daughter, she shall live.” 17But the midwives feared God [with profound reverence] and did not do as the king of Egypt commanded, but they let the boy babies live. 18So the king of Egypt called for the midwives and said to them, “Why have you done this thing, and allowed the boy babies to live?” 19The midwives answered Pharaoh, “Because the Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women; they are vigorous and give birth quickly and their babies are born before the midwife can get to them.” 20So God was good to the midwives, and the people [of Israel] multiplied and became very strong. 21And because the midwives feared God [with profound reverence], He established families and households for them. 22Then Pharaoh commanded all his people, saying, “Every son who is born [to the Hebrews] must be thrown into the Nile, but every daughter you shall keep alive.”

Exodus 2
The Birth Of Moses

1Now a man of the house of Levi [the priestly tribe] went and took as his wife a daughter of Levi. 2The woman conceived and gave birth to a son; and when she saw that he was [especially] beautiful and healthy, she hid him for three months [to protect him from the Egyptians]. 3When she could no longer hide him, she got him a basket (chest) made of papyrus reeds and covered it with tar and pitch [making it waterproof]. Then she put the child in it and set it among the reeds by the bank of the Nile. 4And his sister [Miriam] stood some distance away to find out what would happen to him.

5Now the daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe at the Nile, and [she, together with] her maidens walked along the river’s bank; she saw the basket among the reeds and sent her maid [to get it], and she brought it to her. 6When she opened it, she saw the child, and behold, the baby was crying. And she took pity on him and said, “This is one of the Hebrews’ children.” 7Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and call a wet-nurse from the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?” 8And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go ahead.” So the girl went and called the child’s mother. 9Then Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child away and nurse him for me, and I will give you your wages.” So the woman took the child and nursed him. 10And the child grew, and she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter and he became her son. And she named him Moses, and said, “Because I drew him out of the water.”

11One day, after Moses had grown [into adulthood], it happened that he went to his countrymen and looked [with compassion] at their hard labors; and he saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his countrymen. 12He turned to look around, and seeing no one, he killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. 13He went out the next day and saw two Hebrew men fighting with each other; and he said to the aggressor, “Why are you striking your friend?” 14But the man said, “Who made you a prince and a judge over us? Do you intend to kill me as you killed the Egyptian?” Then Moses was afraid and said, “Certainly this incident is known.” Moses Escapes to Midian 15When Pharaoh heard about this matter, he tried to kill Moses. Then Moses fled from Pharaoh’s presence and took refuge in the land of Midian, where he sat down by a well.

16Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew water [from the well where Moses was resting] and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock. 17Then shepherds came and drove them away, but Moses stood up and helped them and watered their flock. 18When they came to Reuel (Jethro) their father, he said, “How is it that you have come back so soon today?” 19They said, “An Egyptian saved us from the shepherds. He even drew water [from the well] for us and watered the flock.” 20Then he said to his daughters, “Where is he? Why have you left the man behind? Invite him to have something to eat.” 21Moses was willing to remain with the man, and he gave Moses his daughter Zipporah [to be his wife]. 22She gave birth to a son, and he named him Gershom (stranger); for he said, “I have been a stranger in a foreign land.”

23Now it happened after a long time [about forty years] that the king of Egypt died. And the children of Israel (Jacob) groaned and sighed because of the bondage, and they cried out. And their cry for help because of their bondage ascended to God. 24So God heard their groaning and God remembered His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Israel). 25God saw the sons of Israel, and God took notice [of them] and was concerned about them [knowing all, understanding all, remembering all].

Exodus 3
The Burning Bush

1Now Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro (Reuel) his father-in-law, the priest of Midian; and he led his flock to the west side of the wilderness and came to Horeb (Sinai), the mountain of God. 2The Angel of the LORD appeared to him in a blazing flame of fire from the midst of a bush; and he looked, and behold, the bush was on fire, yet it was not consumed. 3So Moses said, “I must turn away [from the flock] and see this great sight—why the bush is not burned up.” 4When the LORD saw that he turned away [from the flock] to look, God called to him from the midst of the bush and said, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here I am.” 5Then God said, “Do not come near; take your sandals off your feet [out of respect], because the place on which you are standing is holy ground.” 6Then He said, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Then Moses hid his face, because he was afraid to look at God.

7The LORD said, “I have in fact seen the affliction (suffering, desolation) of My people who are in Egypt, and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters (oppressors); for I know their pain and suffering. 8So I have come down to rescue them from the hand (power) of the Egyptians, and to bring them up from that land to a land [that is] good and spacious, to a land flowing with milk and honey [a land of plenty]—to the place of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. 9Now, behold, the cry of the children of Israel has come to Me; and I have also seen how the Egyptians oppress them. The Mission of Moses 10“Therefore, come now, and I will send you to Pharaoh, and then bring My people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt.” 11But Moses said to God, “Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh, and that I should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt?” 12And God said, “Certainly I will be with you, and this shall be the sign to you that it is I who have sent you: when you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve and worship God at this mountain.”

13Then Moses said to God, “Behold, when I come to the Israelites and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers (ancestors) has sent me to you,’ and they say to me, ‘What is His name?’ What shall I say to them?” 14God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM”; and He said, “You shall say this to the Israelites, ‘I AM has sent me to you.’” 15Then God also said to Moses, “This is what you shall say to the Israelites, ‘The LORD, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob (Israel), has sent me to you.’ This is My Name forever, and this is My memorial [name] to all generations. 16Go, gather the elders (tribal leaders) of Israel together, and say to them, ‘The LORD, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared to me, saying, I am indeed concerned about you and what has been done to you in Egypt. 17“So I said I will bring you up out of the suffering and oppression of Egypt to the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, to a land flowing with milk and honey.”’ 18The elders [of the tribes] will listen and pay attention to what you say; and you, with the elders of Israel, shall go to the king of Egypt and you shall say to him, ‘The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us; so now, please, [we ask and plead with you,] let us go on a three days’ journey into the wilderness, so that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.’ 19But I know that the king of Egypt will not let you go unless [he is forced] by a strong hand. 20So I will reach out My hand and strike Egypt with all My wonders which I shall do in the midst of it; and after that he will let you go. 21And I will grant this people favor and respect in the sight of the Egyptians; therefore, it shall be that when you go, you will not go empty-handed. 22“But every woman shall [insistently] ask her neighbor and any woman who lives in her house, for articles of silver and articles of gold, and clothing; and you shall put them on your sons and daughters. In this way you are to plunder the Egyptians [leaving bondage with great possessions that are rightfully yours].”

Exodus 4
Moses Given Powers

1Then Moses answered [the LORD] and said, “What if they will not believe me or take seriously what I say? For they may say, ‘The LORD has not appeared to you.’” 2And the LORD said to him, “What is that in your hand?” And he said, “A staff.” 3Then He said, “Throw it on the ground.” So Moses threw it on the ground, and it became a [living] serpent [like the royal symbol on the crown of Pharaoh]; and Moses ran from it. 4But the LORD said to Moses, “Reach out your hand and grasp it by the tail.” So he reached out his hand and caught it, and it became a staff in his hand— 5[“You shall do this,” said the LORD,] “so that the elders may believe that the LORD, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has [most certainly] appeared to you.”

6The LORD also said to him, “Put your hand into your robe [where it covers your chest].” So he put his hand into his robe, and when he took it out, his hand was leprous, as white as snow. 7Then God said, “Put your hand into your robe again.” So he put his hand back into his robe, and when he took it out, it was restored [and was] like the rest of his body. 8“If they will not believe you or pay attention to the evidence of the first sign, they may believe the evidence of the second sign. 9“But if they will not believe these two signs or pay attention to what you say, you are to take some water from the Nile and pour it on the dry ground; and the water which you take out of the river will turn into blood on the dry ground.”

10Then Moses said to the LORD, “Please, Lord, I am not a man of words (eloquent, fluent), neither before nor since You have spoken to Your servant; for I am slow of speech and tongue.” 11The LORD said to him, “Who has made man’s mouth? Or who makes the mute or the deaf, or the seeing or the blind? Is it not I, the LORD? 12“Now then go, and I, even I, will be with your mouth, and will teach you what you shall say.” 13But he said, “Please my Lord, send the message [of rescue to Israel] by [someone else,] whomever else You will [choose].” Aaron to Speak for Moses 14Then the anger of the LORD was kindled and burned against Moses; He said, “Is there not your brother, Aaron the Levite? I know that he speaks fluently. Also, he is coming out to meet you, and when he sees you, he will be overjoyed. 15You must speak to him and put the words in his mouth; I, even I, will be with your mouth and with his mouth, and I will teach you what you are to do. 16Moreover, he shall speak for you to the people; he will act as a mouthpiece for you, and you will be as God to him [telling him what I say to you]. 17“You shall take in your hand this staff, with which you shall perform the signs [the miracles which prove I sent you].”

18Then Moses went away and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and said to him, “Please, let me go back so that I may return to my relatives in Egypt, and see if they are still alive.” And Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.” 19Then the LORD said to Moses in Midian, “Go back to Egypt, for all the men who were seeking your life [for killing the Egyptian] are dead.” 20So Moses took his wife [Zipporah] and his sons [Gershom and Eliezer] and seated them on donkeys, and returned to the land of Egypt. Moses also took the staff of God in his hand.

21The LORD said to Moses, “When you return to Egypt, see that you perform before Pharaoh all the wonders (miracles) which I have put in your hand, but I will harden his heart and make him stubborn so that he will not let the people go. 22Then you shall say to Pharaoh, ‘Thus says the LORD, Israel is My son, My firstborn. 23“So I say to you, ‘Let My son go so that he may serve Me’; and if you refuse to let him go, behold, I will kill your son, your firstborn.”’”

24Now it happened at the lodging place, that the LORD met Moses and sought to kill him [making him deathly ill because he had not circumcised one of his sons]. 25Then Zipporah took a flint knife and cut off the foreskin of her son and threw it at Moses’ feet, and said, “Indeed you are a husband of blood to me!” 26So He let Moses alone [to recover]. At that time Zipporah said, “You are a husband of blood”—because of the circumcision.

27The LORD said to Aaron, “Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.” So he went and met him at the mountain of God (Sinai) and kissed him. 28Moses told Aaron all the words of the LORD with which He had sent him, and all the signs that He had commanded him to do. 29Then Moses and Aaron went [into Egypt] and assembled all the elders of the Israelites; 30and Aaron said all the words which the LORD had spoken to Moses. Then Moses performed the signs [given to him by God] before the people. 31So the people believed; and when they heard that the LORD was concerned about the Israelites and that He had looked [with compassion] on their suffering, then they bowed their heads and worshiped [the LORD].

Exodus 5
Israel’s Labor Increased

1Afterward Moses and Aaron came and said to Pharaoh, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, ‘Let My people go, so that they may celebrate a feast to Me in the wilderness.’” 2But Pharaoh said, “Who is the LORD that I should obey His voice to let Israel go? I do not know the LORD, nor will I let Israel go.” 3Then they said, “The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Please, let us go on a three days’ journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to the LORD our God, so that He does not discipline us with pestilence or with the sword.” 4But the king of Egypt said to Moses and Aaron, “Why do you take the people away from their work? Get back to your burdens!” 5Pharaoh said, “Look, the people of the land are now many, and you would have them stop their work!” 6The very same day Pharaoh gave orders to the [Egyptian] taskmasters in charge of the people and their [Hebrew] foremen, saying, 7“You will no longer give the people straw to make brick as before; let them go and gather straw for themselves. 8But the number of bricks which they were making before, you shall [still] require of them; you are not to reduce it in the least. For they are idle and lazy; that is why they cry, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to our God.’ 9“Let labor be heavier on the men, and let them work [hard] at it so that they will pay no attention to [their God’s] lying words.”

10Then the [Egyptian] taskmasters [in charge] of the people and their [Hebrew] foremen went out and said to the people, “Thus says Pharaoh, ‘I will not give you any straw. 11‘Go, get straw for yourselves wherever you can find it, but your work [quota] will not be reduced in the least.’” 12So the people were scattered throughout the land of Egypt to gather stubble to use for straw. 13And the taskmasters pressured them, saying, “Finish your work, [fulfill] your daily quotas, just as when there was straw [given to you].” 14And the Hebrew foremen, whom Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them, were beaten and were asked, “Why have you not fulfilled your required quota of making bricks yesterday and today, as before?”

15Then the Hebrew foremen came to Pharaoh and cried, “Why do you deal like this with your servants? 16“No straw is given to your servants, yet they say to us, ‘Make bricks!’ And look, your servants are being beaten, but it is the fault of your own people.” 17But Pharaoh said, “You are lazy, very lazy and idle! That is why you say, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to the LORD.’ 18“Get out now and get to work; for no straw will be given to you, yet you are to deliver the same quota of bricks.” 19The Hebrew foremen saw that they were in a bad situation because they were told, “You must not reduce [in the least] your daily quota of bricks.” 20When they left Pharaoh’s presence, the foremen met Moses and Aaron, who were waiting for them. 21And the foremen said to them, “May the LORD look upon you and judge you, because you have made us odious (something hated) in the sight of Pharaoh and his servants, and you have put a sword in their hand to kill us.”

22Then Moses turned again to the LORD and said, “O Lord, why have You brought harm and oppression to this people? Why did You ever send me? [I cannot understand Your purpose!] 23“Ever since I came to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has harmed and oppressed this people, and You have done nothing at all to rescue Your people.”

Exodus 6
God Promises Action

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “Now you shall see what I will do to Pharaoh; for under compulsion he will [not only] let them go, but under compulsion he will drive them out of his land.”

2Then God spoke further to Moses and said to him, “I am the LORD. 3I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob (Israel) as God Almighty [El Shaddai], but by My name, LORD, I did not make Myself known to them [in acts and great miracles]. 4I also established My covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land in which they lived as strangers (temporary residents, foreigners). 5And I have also heard the groaning of the sons of Israel, whom the Egyptians have enslaved, and I have [faithfully] remembered My covenant [with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob]. 6Therefore, say to the children of Israel, ‘I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will free you from their bondage. I will redeem and rescue you with an outstretched (vigorous, powerful) arm and with great acts of judgment [against Egypt]. 7‘Then I will take you for My people, and I will be your God; and you shall know that I am the LORD your God, who redeemed you and brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. 8‘I will bring you to the land which I swore to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Israel); and I will give it to you as a possession. I am the LORD [you have the promise of My changeless omnipotence and faithfulness].’” 9Moses told this to the Israelites, but they did not listen to him because of their impatience and despondency, and because of their forced labor.

10The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 11“Go, tell Pharaoh king of Egypt to let the children of Israel go out of his land.” 12But Moses said to the LORD, “Look, [my own people] the Israelites have not listened to me; so how then will Pharaoh listen to me, for I am unskilled and inept in speech?” 13Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, and gave them a command concerning the Israelites and Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt.

The Heads of Israel 14These are the heads of their fathers’ households. The sons of Reuben, Israel’s (Jacob’s) firstborn: Hanoch and Pallu, Hezron and Carmi; these are the families of Reuben. 15The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman; these are the families of Simeon. 16These are the names of the sons of Levi according to their births: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari; and Levi lived a hundred and thirty-seven years. 17The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, by their families. 18The sons of Kohath: Amram (Moses’ father), Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel; and Kohath lived a hundred and thirty-three years. 19The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of Levi according to their generations. 20Amram married his father’s sister Jochebed, and she gave birth to Aaron and Moses; and Amram lived a hundred and thirty-seven years. 21The sons of Izhar: Korah, Nepheg, and Zichri. 22The sons of Uzziel: Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri. 23Aaron married Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab and the sister of Nahshon, and she gave birth to Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 24The sons of Korah: Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph. These are the [extended] families of the Korahites. 25Eleazar, Aaron’s son, married one of the daughters of Putiel, and she gave birth to Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers’ households of the Levites by their families. 26These are [the same] Aaron and Moses to whom the LORD said, “Bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.” 27They were the ones who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt about bringing the Israelites out of Egypt; these are [the same] Moses and Aaron.

28Now it happened on the day when the LORD spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, 29that He said, “I am the LORD; tell Pharaoh king of Egypt everything that I say to you.” 30But Moses said before the LORD, “Look, I am unskilled and inept in speech; how then will Pharaoh listen to me and pay attention to what I say?”

Exodus 7
“I Will Stretch Out My Hand”

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “Now hear this: I make you as God to Pharaoh [to declare My will and purpose to him]; and your brother Aaron shall be your prophet. 2You shall speak all that I command you, and your brother Aaron shall tell Pharaoh to let the children of Israel go out of his land. 3And I will make Pharaoh’s heart hard, and multiply My signs and My wonders (miracles) in the land of Egypt. 4But Pharaoh will not listen to you, and I shall lay My hand on Egypt and bring out My hosts [like a defensive army, tribe by tribe], My people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great acts of judgment (the plagues). 5“The Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I stretch out My hand on Egypt and bring out the children of Israel from among them.” 6And Moses and Aaron did so; just as the LORD commanded them, so they did. 7Now Moses was eighty years old and Aaron eighty-three years old when they spoke to Pharaoh.

Aaron’s Rod Becomes a Serpent 8Now the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, 9“When Pharaoh says to you, ‘Work a miracle [to prove your authority],’ then you say to Aaron, ‘Take your staff and throw it down before Pharaoh, so that it may become a serpent.’” 10So Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh, and did just as the LORD had commanded; Aaron threw down his staff before Pharaoh and his servants, and it became a serpent. 11Then Pharaoh called for the wise men [skilled in magic and omens] and the sorcerers [skilled in witchcraft], and they also, these magicians (soothsayer-priests) of Egypt, did the same with their secret arts and enchantments. 12For every man threw down his staff and they turned into serpents; but Aaron’s staff swallowed up their staffs. 13Yet Pharaoh’s heart was hardened and he would not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.

Water Is Turned to Blood 14Then the LORD said to Moses, “Pharaoh’s heart is hard; he refuses to let the people go. 15Go to Pharaoh in the morning as he is going out to the water, and wait for him on the bank of the Nile; and you shall take in your hand the staff that was turned into a serpent. 16“You shall say to him, ‘The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to you, saying, “Let My people go, so that they may serve Me in the wilderness. But behold, you have not listened until now.” 17‘Thus says the LORD, By this you shall know and recognize and acknowledge that I am the LORD: look, with the staff in my hand I will strike the water in the Nile, and it shall be turned to blood. 18“The fish in the Nile will die, and the Nile will become foul, and the Egyptians will not be able to drink water from the Nile.”’” 19Then the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Take your staff and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt, over their rivers, over their streams, over their pools, and over all their reservoirs of water, so that they may become blood; and there shall be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, in containers both of wood and of stone.’”

20So Moses and Aaron did as the LORD commanded; Aaron lifted up the staff and struck the waters in the Nile, in the sight of Pharaoh and in the sight of his servants, and all the water that was in the Nile was turned into blood. 21The fish in the Nile died, and the river became foul smelling, and the Egyptians could not drink its water, and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt. 22But the magicians of Egypt did the same by their secret arts and enchantments; so Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did not listen to Moses and Aaron, just as the LORD had said. 23Then Pharaoh turned and went into his house, and he did not take even this [divine sign] to heart. 24So all the Egyptians dug near the river for water to drink, because they could not drink the water of the Nile. 25Seven days passed after the LORD had struck the Nile.

Exodus 8
Frogs Over The Land

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh and say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, “Let My people go, so that they may serve Me. 2However, if you refuse to let them go, hear this: I am going to strike your entire land with frogs. 3The Nile will swarm with frogs, which will come up and go into your home, into your bedroom and on to your bed, and into the houses of your servants and on your people, and into your ovens and your kneading bowls. 4“So the frogs will come up on you and on your people and all your servants.”’” 5Then the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your staff over the rivers, over the streams and canals, over the pools [among the reeds], and make frogs come up on the land of Egypt.’” 6So Aaron stretched out his hand [with his staff] over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt. 7But the magicians (soothsayer-priests) did the same thing with their secret arts and enchantments, and brought up [more] frogs on the land of Egypt.

8Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron and said, “Plead with the LORD that He may take away the frogs from me and my people; and I will let the people go, so that they may sacrifice to the LORD.” 9And Moses said to Pharaoh, “I am entirely at your service: when shall I plead [with the Lord] for you and your servants and your people, so that the frogs may leave you and your houses and remain only in the Nile?”

10Then Pharaoh said, “Tomorrow.” Moses replied, “May it be as you say, so that you may know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that there is no one like the LORD our God. 11“The frogs will leave you and your houses and leave your servants and your people; they will remain only in the Nile.” 12So Moses and Aaron left Pharaoh, and Moses cried out to the LORD [as he had agreed to do] concerning the frogs which God had inflicted on Pharaoh. 13The LORD did as Moses asked, and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courtyards and villages, and out of the fields. 14So they piled them up in heaps, and the land was detestable and stank. 15But when Pharaoh saw that there was [temporary] relief, he hardened his heart and would not listen or pay attention to them, just as the LORD had said.

The Plagues of Gnats and Insects 16Then the LORD said to Moses, “Say to Aaron, ‘Stretch out your staff and strike the dust of the ground, and it will become [biting] gnats (lice) throughout the land of Egypt.’” 17They did so; Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff and struck the dust of the earth, and there were [biting] gnats on man and animal. All the dust of the land became gnats through all the land of Egypt. 18The magicians (soothsayer-priests) tried by their secret arts and enchantments to create gnats, but they could not; and there were gnats on man and animal. 19Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, “This is the [supernatural] finger of God.” But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened and he would not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.

20Now the LORD said to Moses, “Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh as he is coming out to the water [of the Nile], and say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, “Let My people go, so that they may serve Me. 21For if you do not let My people go, hear this: I will send swarms of [bloodsucking] insects on you and on your servants and on your people and into your houses; and the houses of the Egyptians will be full of swarms of insects, as well as the ground on which they stand. 22But on that day I will separate and set apart the land of Goshen, where My people are living, so that no swarms of insects will be there, so that you may know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that I, the LORD, am in the midst of the earth. 23“I will put a division (distinction) between My people and your people. By tomorrow this sign shall be in evidence.”’” 24Then the LORD did so. And there came heavy and oppressive swarms of [bloodsucking] insects into the house of Pharaoh and his servants’ houses; in all the land of Egypt the land was corrupted and ruined because of the [great invasion of] insects.

25Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron and said, “Go, sacrifice to your God [here] in the land [of Egypt].” 26But Moses said, “It is not right [or even possible] to do that, for we will sacrifice to the LORD our God what is repulsive and unacceptable to the Egyptians [that is, animals that the Egyptians consider sacred]. If we sacrifice what is repulsive and unacceptable to the Egyptians, will they not riot and stone us? 27“We must go a three days’ journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to the LORD our God as He commands us.” 28So Pharaoh said, “I will let you go, so that you may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness; only you shall not go very far away. Plead [with your God] for me.” 29Moses said, “I am going to leave you, and I will urgently petition (pray, entreat) the LORD that the swarms of insects may leave Pharaoh, his servants, and his people tomorrow; only do not let Pharaoh act deceitfully again by not letting the people go to sacrifice to the LORD.”

30So Moses left Pharaoh and prayed to the LORD [on behalf of Pharaoh]. 31The LORD did as Moses asked, and removed the swarms of [bloodsucking] insects from Pharaoh, from his servants and from his people; not one remained. 32But Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and he did not let the people go.

Exodus 9
Egyptian Livestock Die

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh and tell him, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: “Let My people go, so that they may serve Me. 2But if you refuse to let them go and continue to hold them, 3now hear this: the hand of the LORD will fall on your livestock which are out in the field, on the horses, the donkeys, the camels, the herds, and the flocks—a horrible plague shall come. 4“But the LORD will make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, so that nothing that belongs to the Israelites will die.”’” 5The LORD set a [definite] time, saying, “Tomorrow the LORD will do this thing in the land.” 6And the LORD did this thing the next day, and all [kinds of] the livestock of Egypt died; but of the livestock of the Israelites, not one died. 7Then Pharaoh sent [men to investigate], and not even one of the livestock of the Israelites had died. But the heart of Pharaoh was hardened [and his mind was firmly set], and he did not let the people go.

The Plague of Boils 8Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “Take handfuls of soot from the brick kiln, and let Moses throw it toward the sky in the sight of Pharaoh. 9“It will become fine dust over the entire land of Egypt, and it will become boils breaking out in sores on man and animal in all the land [occupied by the Egyptians].” 10So they took soot from the kiln, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses threw it toward the sky, and it became boils erupting in sores on man and animal. 11The magicians (soothsayer-priests) could not stand before Moses because of the boils, for the boils were on the magicians as well as on all the Egyptians. 12But the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he did not listen or pay attention to them, just as the LORD had told Moses.

13Then the LORD said to Moses, “Get up early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh and say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of the Hebrews, “Let My people go, so that they may serve Me. 14For this time I will send all My plagues on you [in full force,] and on your servants and on your people, so that you may know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that there is no one like Me in all the earth. 15For by now I could have put out My hand and struck you and your people with a pestilence, and you would then have been cut off (obliterated) from the earth. 16But indeed for this very reason I have allowed you to live, in order to show you My power and in order that My name may be proclaimed throughout all the earth. The Plague of Hail 17Since you are still [arrogantly] exalting yourself [in defiance] against My people by not letting them go, 18hear this: tomorrow about this time I will send a very heavy and dreadful hail, such as has not been seen in Egypt from the day it was founded until now. 19“Now therefore send [a message], bring your livestock and whatever you have in the field to safety. Every man and animal that is in the field and is not brought home shall be struck by the hail and shall die.”’” 20Then everyone among the servants of Pharaoh who feared the word of the LORD made his servants and his livestock flee into the houses and shelters; 21but everyone who ignored and did not take seriously the word of the LORD left his servants and his livestock in the field.

22Now the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand [with your staff] toward the sky, so that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, on man and on animal and on all the vegetation of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.” 23Moses stretched out his staff toward the sky, and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and lightning (fireballs) ran down to the earth and along the ground. And the LORD rained hail on the land of Egypt. 24So there was hail, and lightning (fireballs) flashing intermittently in the midst of the extremely heavy hail, such as had not been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. 25The hail struck down everything that was in the field throughout all the land of Egypt, both man and animal; the hail struck and beat down all the plants in the field and shattered every tree in the field. 26Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel lived, was there no hail.

27Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron, and said to them, “I have sinned this time; the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. 28“Pray and entreat the LORD, for there has been enough of God’s thunder and hail; I will let you go, and you shall stay here no longer.” 29Moses said to him, “As soon as I leave the city, I will stretch out my hands to the LORD; the thunder will cease and there will be no more hail, so that you may know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that the earth is the LORD’S. 30“But as for you and your servants, I know that you do not yet fear the LORD God.” 31(Now the flax and the barley were battered and ruined [by the hail], because the barley was in the ear (ripe, but soft) and the flax was in bud, 32but the wheat and spelt (coarse wheat) were not battered and ruined, because they ripen late in the season.) 33So Moses left the city and Pharaoh, and stretched out his hands to the LORD; then the thunder and hail ceased, and rain no longer poured on the earth. 34But when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunder had ceased, he sinned again and hardened his heart, both he and his servants. 35Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he did not let the Israelites go, just as the LORD had said through Moses.

Exodus 10
The Plague Of Locusts

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants [making them determined and unresponsive], so that I may exhibit My signs [of divine power] among them, 2and that you may recount and explain in the hearing of your son, and your grandson, what I have done [repeatedly] to make a mockery of the Egyptians—My signs [of divine power] which I have done among them—so that you may know [without any doubt] and recognize [clearly] that I am the LORD.”

3So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said to him, “Thus says the LORD, the God of the Hebrews: ‘How long will you refuse to humble yourself before Me? Let My people go, so that they may serve Me. 4‘For if you refuse to let My people go, then hear this: tomorrow I will bring [migratory] locusts into your country. 5‘They shall cover the [visible] surface of the land, so that no one will be able to see the ground, and they will eat the rest of what has remained—that is, the vegetation left after the hail—and they will eat every one of your trees that grows in the field; 6your houses and those of all your servants and of all the Egyptians shall be filled with locusts, as neither your fathers nor your grandfathers have seen, from their birth until this day.’” Then Moses turned and left Pharaoh. 7Pharaoh’s servants said to him, “How long shall this man be a trap to us? Let the men go, so that they may serve the LORD their God. Do you not realize that Egypt is destroyed?” 8So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh, and he said to them, “Go, serve the LORD your God! Who specifically are the ones that are going?” 9Moses said, “We will go with our young and our old, with our sons and our daughters, with our flocks and our herds [all of us and all that we have], for we must hold a feast to the LORD.” 10Pharaoh said to them, “The LORD be with you [to help you], if I ever let you go with your children [because you will never return]! Look [be forewarned], you have an evil plan in mind. 11“No! Go now, you who are men, [without your families] and serve the LORD, if that is what you want.” So Moses and Aaron were driven from Pharaoh’s presence.

12Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, so that they may come up on the land of Egypt and eat all the plants of the land, all that the hail has left.” 13So Moses stretched out his staff over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind on the land all that day and all that night; when it was morning, the east wind had brought the [swarms of] locusts. 14The locusts came up over all the land of Egypt and settled down in the whole territory, a very dreadful mass of them; never before were there such locusts as these, nor will there ever be again. 15For they covered the [visible] surface of the land, so that the ground was darkened; and they ate every plant of the land and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left. There remained not a green thing on the trees or the plants of the field throughout all the land of Egypt. 16Then Pharaoh hurried to call for Moses and Aaron, and he said, “I have sinned against the LORD your God and against you. 17“Now therefore, please forgive my sin only this once [more], and pray and entreat the LORD your God, so that He will remove this [plague of] death from me.” 18Moses left Pharaoh and entreated the LORD. 19So the LORD shifted the wind to a violent west wind which lifted up the locusts and drove them into the Red Sea; not one locust remained within the border of Egypt. 20But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart [so that it was even more resolved and obstinate], and he did not let the Israelites go.

Darkness over the Land 21Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward the sky, so that darkness may come over the land of Egypt, a darkness which [is so awful that it] may be felt.” 22So Moses stretched out his hand toward the sky, and for three days a thick darkness was all over the land of Egypt [no sun, no moon, no stars]. 23The Egyptians could not see one another, nor did anyone leave his place for three days, but all the Israelites had [supernatural] light in their dwellings. 24Then Pharaoh called to Moses, and said, “Go, serve the LORD; only your flocks and your herds must be left behind. Even your children may go with you.” 25But Moses said, “You must also let us have sacrifices and burnt offerings, so that we may sacrifice them to the LORD our God. 26“Therefore, our livestock must also go with us; not one hoof shall be left behind, for we must take some of them to serve the LORD our God. Even we do not know with what we will serve the LORD until we arrive there.” 27But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he was not willing to let them go. 28Then Pharaoh said to Moses, “Get away from me! See that you never enter my presence again, for on the day that you see my face again you will die!” 29Then Moses said, “You are correct; I will never see your face again!”

Exodus 11
The Last Plague

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “I will bring yet one more plague on Pharaoh and on Egypt; after that he will let you go. When he lets you go, he will most certainly drive you out of here completely. 2“Speak so that all of the people [of Israel] may hear, and tell every man to ask from his neighbor, and every woman to ask from her neighbor, articles of silver, and articles of gold.” 3The LORD gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was greatly esteemed in the land of Egypt, [both] in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants and in the sight of the people.

4Then Moses said, “Thus says the LORD: ‘At midnight I am going out into the midst of Egypt, 5and all the firstborn in the land [the pride, hope, and joy] of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits on his throne, to the firstborn of the slave girl who is behind the hand-mill, and all the firstborn of cattle as well. 6‘There shall be a great cry [of heartache and sorrow] throughout the land of Egypt, such as has never been before and such as shall never be again. 7‘But not even a dog will threaten any of the Israelites, whether man or animal, so that you may know [without any doubt] and acknowledge how the LORD makes a distinction between Egypt and Israel.’ 8“All these servants of yours will come down to me and bow down before me, saying, ‘Get out, you and all the people who follow you.’ After that I will leave.” And he left Pharaoh in the heat of anger.

9Then the LORD said to Moses, “Pharaoh will not listen to you, so that My wonders (miracles) may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.” 10Moses and Aaron did all these wonders (miracles) before Pharaoh; yet the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he did not let the Israelites go out of his land.

Exodus 12
The Passover Lamb

1The LORD said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, 2“This month shall be the beginning of months to you; it is to be the first month of the year to you. 3Tell all the congregation of Israel, ‘On the tenth [day] of this month they are to take a lamb or young goat for themselves, according to [the size of] the household of which he is the father, a lamb or young goat for each household. 4‘Now if the household is too small for a lamb [to be consumed], let him and his next door neighbor take one according to the number of people [in the households]; according to what each man can eat, you are to divide the lamb. 5‘Your lamb or young goat shall be [perfect] without blemish or bodily defect, a male a year old; you may take it from the sheep or from the goats. 6‘You shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month, then the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel is to slaughter it at twilight. 7‘Moreover, they shall take some of the blood and put it on the two doorposts and on the lintel [above the door] of the houses in which they eat it. 8‘They shall eat the meat that same night, roasted in fire, and they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. 9‘Do not eat any of it raw or boiled in water, but roasted in fire—both its head and its legs, along with its inner parts. 10‘You shall let none of the meat remain until the morning, and anything that remains left over until morning, you shall burn completely in the fire. 11‘Now you are to eat it in this manner: [be prepared for a journey] with your loins girded [that is, with the outer garment tucked into the band], your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; you shall eat it quickly—it is the LORD’S Passover. 12‘For I [the LORD] will pass through the land of Egypt on this night, and will strike down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and animal; against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments [exhibiting their worthlessness]. I am the LORD. 13‘The blood shall be a sign for you on [the doorposts of] the houses where you live; when I see the blood I shall pass over you, and no affliction shall happen to you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.

Feast of Unleavened Bread 14‘Now this day will be a memorial to you, and you shall keep it as a feast to the LORD; throughout your generations you are to celebrate it as an ordinance forever. 15‘[In the celebration of the Passover in future years,] seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, but on the first day you shall remove the leaven from your houses [because it represents the spread of sin]; for whoever eats leavened bread on the first day through the seventh day, that person shall be cut off and excluded from [the atonement made for] Israel. 16‘On the first day [of the feast] you shall have a holy and solemn assembly, and on the seventh day there shall be another holy and solemn assembly; no work of any kind shall be done on those days, except for the preparation of food which every person must eat—only that may be done by you. 17‘You shall also observe the Feast of Unleavened Bread, because on this very day I brought your hosts [grouped according to tribal armies] out of the land of Egypt; therefore you shall observe this day throughout your generations as an ordinance forever. 18‘In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, you shall eat unleavened bread, [and continue] until the twenty-first day of the month at evening. 19‘Seven days no leaven shall be found in your houses; whoever eats what is leavened shall be cut off and excluded from [the atonement made for] the congregation of Israel, whether a stranger or native-born. 20‘You shall eat nothing leavened; in all your dwellings you shall eat unleavened bread.’”

21Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel and said to them, “Go and take a lamb for yourselves according to [the size of] your families and slaughter the Passover lamb. 22You shall take a bunch of hyssop, dip it in the blood which is in the basin, and touch some of the blood to the lintel [above the doorway] and to the two doorposts; and none of you shall go outside the door of his house until morning. A Memorial of Redemption 23For the LORD will pass through to strike the Egyptians; and when He sees the blood on the lintel [above the entry way] and on the two doorposts, the LORD will pass over the door and will not allow the destroyer to come into your houses to slay you. 24You shall observe this event [concerning Passover] as an ordinance for you and for your children forever. 25When you enter the land which the LORD will give you, as He has promised, you shall keep and observe this service. 26When your children say to you, ‘What does this service mean to you?’ 27you shall say, ‘It is the sacrifice of the LORD’S Passover, for He passed over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt when He struck the Egyptians, but spared our houses.’” And the people bowed [their heads] low and worshiped [God].

28Then the Israelites went and did [as they had been told]: just as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, so they did.

29Now it happened at midnight that the LORD struck every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the prisoner who was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of the cattle. 30Pharaoh got up in the night, he and all his servants and all the Egyptians, and there was a great cry [of heartache and sorrow] in Egypt, for there was no house where there was not someone dead. 31Then he called for Moses and Aaron at night and said, “Get up, get out from among my people, both you and the Israelites; and go, serve the LORD, as you said. 32“Take both your flocks and your herds, as you have said, and go, and [ask your God to] bless me also.” Exodus of Israel 33The Egyptians [anxiously] urged the people [to leave], to send them out of the land quickly, for they said, “We will all be dead.” 34So the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading bowls being bound up in their clothes on their shoulders.

35Now the Israelites had acted in accordance with the word of Moses; and they had asked the Egyptians for articles of silver and articles of gold, and clothing. 36The LORD gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they gave them what they asked. And so they plundered the Egyptians [of those things].

37Now the Israelites journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand men on foot, besides [the women and] the children. 38A mixed multitude [of non-Israelites from foreign nations] also went with them, along with both flocks and herds, a very large number of livestock. 39And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought from Egypt; it was not leavened, since they were driven [quickly] from Egypt and could not delay, nor had they prepared any food for themselves.

40Now the period of time the children of Israel lived in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years. 41At the end of the four hundred and thirty years, to that very day, all the hosts of the LORD [gathered into tribal armies] left the land of Egypt. Ordinance of the Passover 42It is a night of watching to be observed for the LORD for having brought them out of the land of Egypt; this [same] night is for the LORD, to be observed and celebrated by all the Israelites throughout their generations.

43The LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the ordinance of the Passover: no foreigner is to eat it; 44but every man’s slave who is bought with money, after you have circumcised him, then he may eat it. 45No stranger (temporary resident, foreigner) or hired servant shall eat it. 46It is to be eaten inside one house; you shall not take any of the meat outside the house, nor shall you break any of its bones. 47The entire congregation of Israel shall keep and celebrate it. 48If a stranger living temporarily among you wishes to celebrate the Passover to the LORD, all his males must be circumcised, and then he may participate and celebrate it like one that is born in the land. But no uncircumcised person may eat it. 49“The same law shall apply to the native-born and to the stranger who lives temporarily among you.”

50Then all the Israelites did so; they did just as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron. 51And on that very same day the LORD brought the Israelites out of the land of Egypt by their hosts (tribal armies).

Exodus 13
Consecration Of The Firstborn

1The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Sanctify to Me [that is, set apart for My purpose] every firstborn, the first offspring of every womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of animal; it is Mine.”

3Moses said to the people, “Remember [solemnly observe and commemorate] this day on which you came out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage and slavery; for by a strong and powerful hand the LORD brought you out of this place. And nothing leavened shall be eaten. 4On this day in the month Abib, you are about to go onward. 5And it shall be when the LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which He swore to your fathers to give you, a land [of abundance] flowing with milk and honey, that you shall keep and observe this rite (service) in this month. 6For seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be a feast to the LORD. 7Unleavened bread shall be eaten throughout the seven days; no leavened bread shall be seen with you, nor shall there be leaven within the borders of your territory. 8You shall explain this to your son on that day, saying, ‘It is because of what the LORD did for me when I came out of Egypt.’ 9It shall serve as a sign to you on your hand (arm), and as a reminder on your forehead, so that the instruction (law) of the LORD may be in your mouth; for with a strong and powerful hand the LORD brought you out of Egypt. 10Therefore, you shall keep this ordinance at this time from year to year.

11“Now it shall be when the LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanite, as He swore to you and your fathers, and gives it to you, 12you shall set apart and dedicate to the LORD all that first opens the womb. All the firstborn males of your livestock shall be the LORD’S. 13“Every firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem by [substituting] a lamb [as a sacrifice for it], but if you do not [wish to] redeem it, then you shall break its neck; and every firstborn among your sons you shall redeem [that is, “buy back” from God with a suitable sacrifice]. 14And it shall be when your son asks you in time to come, saying, ‘What does this mean?’ you shall say to him, ‘With a strong and powerful hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt, from the house of bondage and slavery. 15‘For it happened, when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, that the LORD struck every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man and the firstborn of animal. Therefore, I sacrifice to the LORD all the males, the first [to be born] of every womb, but every firstborn of my sons I redeem.’ 16“So it shall serve as a sign and a reminder on your [left] hand (arm) and as frontlets between your eyes, for by a strong and powerful hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt.”

God Leads the People 17So it happened, when Pharaoh let the people go, God did not lead them by way of the land of the Philistines, even though it was nearer; for God said, “The people might change their minds when they see war [that is, that there will be war], and return to Egypt.” 18But God led the people around by the way of the wilderness toward the Red Sea; the sons of Israel went up in battle array (orderly ranks, marching formation) out of the land of Egypt. 19Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for Joseph had solemnly ordered (placed under an oath) the Israelites, saying, “God will assuredly take care of you, and you must carry my bones away from here with you.” 20They journeyed from Succoth [in Goshen] and camped at Etham on the edge of the wilderness. 21The [presence of the] LORD was going before them by day in a pillar (column) of cloud to lead them along the way, and in a pillar of fire by night to give them light, so that they could travel by day and by night. 22He did not withdraw the pillar of cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from going before the people.

Exodus 14
Pharaoh In Pursuit

1Now the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Tell the sons of Israel to turn back and camp in front of Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea. You shall camp in front of Baal-zephon, opposite it, by the sea. 3For Pharaoh will say of the Israelites, ‘They are wandering aimlessly in the land; the wilderness has shut them in.’ 4“I will harden (make stubborn, defiant) Pharaoh’s heart, so that he will pursue them; and I will be glorified and honored through Pharaoh and all his army, and the Egyptians shall know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that I am the LORD.” And they did so.

5When the king of Egypt was told that the people had fled, Pharaoh and his servants had a change of heart toward the people, and they said, “What is this that we have done? We have let Israel go from serving us!” 6So Pharaoh harnessed horses to his war-chariots [for battle] and took his army with him; 7and he took six hundred chosen war-chariots, and all the other war-chariots of Egypt with fighting charioteers over all of them. 8The LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and he pursued the Israelites, as they were leaving confidently and defiantly. 9The Egyptians chased them with all the horses and war-chariots of Pharaoh, his horsemen and his army, and they overtook them as they camped by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, in front of Baal-zephon.

10As Pharaoh approached, the Israelites looked up and saw the Egyptians marching after them, and they were very frightened; so the Israelites cried out to the LORD. 11Then they said to Moses, “Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? What is this that you have done to us by bringing us out of Egypt? 12“Did we not say to you in Egypt, ‘Leave us alone; let us serve the Egyptians?’ For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians [as slaves] than to die in the wilderness.” The Sea Is Divided 13Then Moses said to the people, “Do not be afraid! Take your stand [be firm and confident and undismayed] and see the salvation of the LORD which He will accomplish for you today; for those Egyptians whom you have seen today, you will never see again. 14“The LORD will fight for you while you [only need to] keep silent and remain calm.”

15The LORD said to Moses, “Why do you cry to Me? Tell the sons of Israel to move forward [toward the sea]. 16As for you, lift up your staff and stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it, so that the sons of Israel may go through the middle of the sea on dry land. 17As for Me, hear this: I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they will go in [the sea] after them; and I will be glorified and honored through Pharaoh and all his army, and his war-chariots and his horsemen. 18“And the Egyptians shall know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that I am the LORD, when I am glorified and honored through Pharaoh, through his war-chariots and his charioteers.”

19The angel of God, who had been going in front of the camp of Israel, moved and went behind them. The pillar of the cloud moved from in front and stood behind them. 20So it came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel. It was a cloud along with darkness [even by day to the Egyptians], but it gave light by night [to the Israelites]; so one [army] did not come near the other all night.

21Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD swept the sea back by a strong east wind all that night and turned the seabed into dry land, and the waters were divided. 22The Israelites went into the middle of the sea on dry land, and the waters formed a wall to them on their right hand and on their left. 23Then the Egyptians pursued them into the middle of the sea, even all Pharaoh’s horses, his war-chariots and his charioteers. 24So it happened at the early morning watch [before dawn], that the LORD looked down on the army of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and cloud and put them in a state of confusion. 25He made their chariot wheels hard to turn, and the chariots difficult to drive; so the Egyptians said, “Let us flee from Israel, for the LORD is fighting for them against the Egyptians.”

26Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea so that the waters may come back over the Egyptians, on their war-chariots and their charioteers.” 27So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to its normal flow at sunrise; and the Egyptians retreated right into it [being met by the returning water]; so the LORD overthrew the Egyptians and tossed them into the midst of the sea. 28The waters returned and covered the chariots and the charioteers, and all the army of Pharaoh that had gone into the sea after them; not even one of them survived. 29But the Israelites walked on dry land in the middle of the sea, and the waters formed a wall to them on their right hand and on their left.

30The LORD saved Israel that day from the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians [lying] dead on the seashore. 31When Israel saw the great power which the LORD had used against the Egyptians, they feared the LORD [with reverence and awe-filled respect], and they believed in the LORD, and in His servant Moses.

Exodus 15
The Song Of Moses And Israel

1Then Moses and the children of Israel sang this song to the LORD, singing,
“I will sing to the LORD, for He has triumphed gloriously;
The horse and its rider He has thrown into the sea.
2“The LORD is my strength and my song,
And He has become my salvation;
This is my God, and I will praise Him;
My father’s God, and I will exalt Him.
3“The LORD is a warrior;
The LORD is His name.
4“Pharaoh’s chariots and his army He has thrown into the sea;
His chosen captains are drowned in the Red Sea.
5“The deep [water] covers them;
[Clad in armor] they sank into the depths like a stone.
6“Your right hand, O LORD, is glorious in power;
Your right hand, O LORD, shatters the enemy.
7“In the greatness of Your majesty You overthrow and annihilate those [adversaries] who rise [in rebellion] against You;
You send out Your fury, and it consumes them like chaff.
8“With the blast of Your nostrils the waters piled up,
The flowing waters stood up like a mound;
The deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea.
9“The enemy said, ‘I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil;
My desire shall be satisfied against them;
I will draw my sword, my hand shall dispossess them and drive them out.’
10“You blew with Your wind, the sea covered them;
[Clad in armor] they sank like lead in the mighty waters.
11“Who is like You among the gods, O LORD?
Who is like You, majestic in holiness,
Awesome in splendor, working wonders?
12“You stretched out Your right hand,
The sea swallowed them.
13“You in Your lovingkindness and goodness have led the people whom You have redeemed;
In Your strength You have guided them with care to Your holy habitation.
14“The peoples have heard [about You], they tremble;
Anguish and fear has gripped the inhabitants of Philistia.
15“Then the [tribal] chiefs of Edom were dismayed and horrified;
The [mighty] leaders of Moab, trembling grips them;
All the inhabitants of Canaan have melted away [in despair]—
16Terror and dread fall on them;
Because of the greatness of Your arm they are as still as a stone;
Until Your people pass by and [into Canaan], O LORD,
Until the people pass by whom You have purchased.
17“You will bring them [into the land of promise] and plant them on the mountain (Mt. Moriah in Jerusalem) of Your inheritance,
The place, O LORD, You have made for Your dwelling [among them],
The sanctuary, O Lord, which Your hands have established.
18“The LORD shall reign to eternity and beyond.”

19For the horses of Pharaoh went with his war-chariots and his charioteers into the sea, and the LORD brought back the waters of the sea on them, but the sons of Israel walked on dry land in the middle of the sea.

20Then Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron [and Moses], took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women followed her with timbrels and dancing. 21Miriam answered them,
“Sing to the LORD, for He has triumphed gloriously and is highly exalted;
The horse and its rider He has hurled into the sea.”

The LORD Provides Water 22Then Moses led Israel from the Red Sea, and they went into the Wilderness of Shur; they went [a distance of] three days (about thirty-three miles) in the wilderness and found no water. 23Then they came to Marah, but they could not drink its waters because they were bitter; therefore it was named Marah (bitter). 24The people [grew discontented and] grumbled at Moses, saying, “What are we going to drink?” 25Then he cried to the LORD [for help], and the LORD showed him a tree, [a branch of] which he threw into the waters, and the waters became sweet.

There the LORD made a statute and an ordinance for them, and there He tested them, 26saying, “If you will diligently listen and pay attention to the voice of the LORD your God, and do what is right in His sight, and listen to His commandments, and keep [foremost in your thoughts and actively obey] all His precepts and statutes, then I will not put on you any of the diseases which I have put on the Egyptians; for I am the LORD who heals you.”

27Then the children of Israel came to Elim where there were twelve springs of water and seventy date palms, and they camped there beside the waters.

Exodus 16
The LORD Provides Manna

1They set out from Elim, and all the congregation of Israel came to the Wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after they left the land of Egypt. 2The whole congregation of the Israelites [grew discontented and] murmured and rebelled against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness, 3and the Israelites said to them, “Would that we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the pots of meat and ate bread until we were full; for you have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this entire assembly with hunger.”

4Then the LORD said to Moses, “Behold, I will cause bread to rain from heaven for you; the people shall go out and gather a day’s portion every day, so that I may test them [to determine] whether or not they will walk [obediently] in My instruction (law). 5“And it shall be that on the sixth day, they shall prepare to bring in twice as much as they gather daily [so that they will not need to gather on the seventh day].” 6So Moses and Aaron said to all Israel, “At evening you shall know that the LORD has brought you out of the land of Egypt, 7and in the morning you will see the glory of the LORD, for He hears your murmurings against the LORD. What are we, that you murmur and rebel against us?” The LORD Provides Meat 8Moses said, “This will happen when the LORD gives you meat to eat in the evening, and in the morning [enough] bread to be fully satisfied, because the LORD has heard your murmurings against Him; for what are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against the LORD.”

9Then Moses said to Aaron, “Say to all the congregation of Israel, ‘Approach the LORD, because He has heard your murmurings.’” 10So it happened that as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of Israel, they looked toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory and brilliance of the LORD appeared in the cloud! 11Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 12“I have heard the murmurings of the Israelites; speak to them, saying, ‘At twilight you shall eat meat, and in the morning you shall be filled with bread; and you shall know that I am the LORD your God.’”

13So in the evening the quails came up and covered the camp, and in the morning there was a blanket of dew around the camp. 14When the layer of dew evaporated, on the surface of the wilderness there was a fine, flake-like thing, as fine as frost on the ground. 15When the Israelites saw it, they said to one another, “What is it?” For they did not know what it was. And Moses said to them, “This is the bread which the LORD has given you to eat. 16“This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Let every man gather as much of it as he needs. Take an omer for each person, according to the number of people each of you has in his tent.’” 17The Israelites did so, and some gathered much [of it] and some [only a] little. 18When they measured it with an omer, he who had gathered a large amount had no excess, and he who had gathered little had no lack; every man gathered according to his need (family size). 19Moses said, “Let none of it be left [overnight] until [the next] morning.” 20But they did not listen to Moses, and some left a supply of it until morning, and it bred worms and became foul and rotten; and Moses was angry with them. 21So they gathered it every morning, each as much as he needed, because when the sun was hot it melted.

The Sabbath Observed 22Now on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each person; and all the leaders of the congregation came and told Moses. 23He said to them, “This is what the LORD has said: ‘Tomorrow is a solemn rest, a holy Sabbath to the LORD’; bake and boil what you will bake and boil [today], and all that remains left over put aside for yourselves to keep until morning.” 24They put it aside until morning, as Moses told them, and it did not become foul nor was it wormy. 25Then Moses said, “Eat that today, for today is a Sabbath to the LORD; today you will not find it in the field. 26“Six days you shall gather it, but on the seventh day, the Sabbath, there will be none [in the field].”

27Now on the seventh day some of the people went out to gather, but they found none. 28Then the LORD said to Moses, “How long do you [people] refuse to keep My commandments and My instructions (laws)? 29“See, the LORD has given you the Sabbath; therefore He gives you the bread for two days on the sixth day. Let every man stay in his place; no man is to leave his place on the seventh day.” 30So the people rested on the seventh day.

31The house of Israel called the bread manna; it was like coriander seed, white, and it tasted like flat pastry (wafers) made with honey. 32Then Moses said, “This is the word which the LORD commands, ‘Let an omer of it be kept throughout your generations, that they may see the bread with which I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.’” 33So Moses said to Aaron, “Take a pot and put an omer of manna in it, and place it before the LORD to be kept throughout your generations.” 34As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron [eventually] placed it in the presence of the Testimony, to be kept. 35The Israelites ate manna forty years, until they reached an inhabited land; they ate the manna until they came to the border of the land of Canaan. 36(Now an omer is the tenth of an ephah.)

Exodus 17
Water In The Rock

1Then all the congregation of the children of Israel moved on from the Wilderness of Sin by stages, according to the commandment of the LORD, and camped at Rephidim, but there was no water for the people to drink. 2Therefore the people quarreled with Moses and said, “Give us water so we may [have something to] drink.” And Moses said to them, “Why do you quarrel with me? Why do you tempt the LORD and try His patience?” 3But the people were thirsty for water; and the people murmured against Moses and said, “Why did you bring us up from Egypt to kill us and our children and our livestock with thirst?” 4So Moses cried out to the LORD for help, saying, “What shall I do with this people? They are almost ready to stone me.” 5Then the LORD said to Moses, “Pass before the people and take with you some of the elders of Israel; and take in your hand the staff with which you struck the Nile, and go. 6“Behold, I will stand before you there on the rock at Horeb; there you shall strike the rock, and water will come out of it, so that the people may [have something to] drink.” And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel. 7He named the place [where this miracle occurred] Massah (test) and Meribah (contention) because of the quarreling of the sons of Israel, and because they tested the [patience of the] LORD, saying, “Is the LORD among us, or not?”

Amalek Fought 8Then Amalek [and his people] came and fought with Israel at Rephidim. 9So Moses said to Joshua, “Choose men for us and go out, fight against Amalek [and his people]. Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand.” 10So Joshua did as Moses said, and fought with Amalek; and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the hilltop. 11Now when Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed, and when he lowered his hand [due to fatigue], Amalek prevailed. 12But Moses’ hands were heavy and he grew tired. So they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it. Then Aaron and Hur held up his hands, one on one side and one on the other side; so it was that his hands were steady until the sun set. 13So Joshua overwhelmed and defeated Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.

14Then the LORD said to Moses, “Write this in the book as a memorial and recite it to Joshua, that I will utterly wipe out the memory of Amalek [and his people] from under heaven.” 15And Moses built an altar and named it The LORD Is My Banner; 16saying, “The LORD has sworn [an oath]; the LORD will have war against [the people of] Amalek from generation to generation.”

Exodus 18
Jethro, Moses’ Father-In-Law

1Now Jethro (Reuel), the priest of Midian, Moses’ father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel His people, and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt. 2Then Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took Moses’ wife Zipporah, after he had sent her away [from Egypt], 3along with her two sons, of whom one was named Gershom (stranger), for Moses said, “I have been a stranger in a foreign land.” 4The other [son] was named Eliezer (my God is help), for Moses said, “The God of my father was my help, and He rescued me from the sword of Pharaoh.”

5Then Jethro, his father-in-law, came with Moses’ sons and his wife to [join] Moses in the wilderness where he was camped, at the mountain of God [that is, Mt. Sinai in Horeb]. 6He sent a message to Moses, “I, your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons [who are] with her.” 7So Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and he bowed down [in respect] and kissed him. They asked each other about their well-being and went into the tent. 8Moses told his father-in-law about all that the LORD had done to Pharaoh and the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, and about all the hardship that had happened during the journey, and how the LORD had rescued them. 9Jethro rejoiced over all the good things the LORD had done to Israel, in that He had rescued them from the hand of the Egyptians. 10Jethro said, “Blessed be the LORD, who has rescued you from the hand of the Egyptians and from the hand of Pharaoh, and who has rescued the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. 11“Now I know that the LORD is greater than all gods; indeed, it was proven when they acted insolently toward Israel [and the LORD showed Himself infinitely superior to all their gods].” 12Then Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took a burnt offering and [other] sacrifices [to offer] to God, and Aaron came with all the elders of Israel to eat a meal with Moses’ father-in-law before God.

13Now the next day Moses sat to judge [the disputes] the people [had with one another], and the people stood around Moses from dawn to dusk. 14When Moses’ father-in-law saw everything that he was doing for the people, he said, “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why are you sitting alone [as a judge] with all the people standing around you from dawn to dusk?” 15Moses said to his father-in-law, “Because the people come to me to ask [about the will] of God. 16“When they have a dispute they come to me, and I judge between a man and his neighbor and I make known the statutes of God and His laws.” Jethro Counsels Moses 17Moses’ father-in-law said to him, “The thing that you are doing is not good. 18You will certainly wear out both yourself and these people who are with you, because the task is too heavy for you [to bear]; you cannot do it alone. 19Now listen to me; I will advise you, and may God be with you [to confirm my advice]. You shall represent the people before God. You shall bring their disputes and causes to Him. 20You shall teach them the decrees and laws. You shall show them the way they are to live and the work they are to do. 21Furthermore, you shall select from all the people competent men who [reverently] fear God, men of truth, those who hate dishonest gain; you shall place these over the people as leaders of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties and of tens. 22They shall judge the people at all times; have them bring every major dispute to you, but let them judge every minor dispute themselves. So it will be easier for you, and they will bear the burden with you. 23“If you will do this thing and God so commands you, then you will be able to endure [the responsibility], and all these people will also go [back] to their tents in peace.”

24So Moses listened to his father-in-law and did everything that he had said. 25Moses chose able men from all Israel and made them heads over the people, leaders of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties and of tens [from the highest to the lowest judicial levels]. 26And they judged the people at all times; they would bring the difficult cases to Moses, but every minor dispute they judged and decided themselves. 27Then Moses said goodbye to his father-in-law, and Jethro went back to his own land (Midian).

Exodus 19
Moses On Sinai

1In the third month after the children of Israel had left the land of Egypt, the very same day, they came into the Wilderness of Sinai. 2When they moved out from Rephidim, they came to the Wilderness of Sinai and they camped there; Israel camped at the base of the mountain [of Sinai]. 3Moses went up to God [on the mountain], and the LORD called to him from the mountain, saying, “Say this to the house of Jacob and tell the Israelites: 4‘You have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I carried you on eagles’ wings, and brought you to Myself. 5‘Now therefore, if you will in fact obey My voice and keep My covenant (agreement), then you shall be My own special possession and treasure from among all peoples [of the world], for all the earth is Mine; 6and you shall be to Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation [set apart for My purpose].’ These are the words that you shall speak to the Israelites.”

7So Moses called for the elders of the people, and told them all these words which the LORD commanded him. 8All the people answered together and said, “We will do everything that the LORD has spoken.” And Moses reported the words of the people to the LORD. 9The LORD said to Moses, “Behold, I will come to you in a thick cloud, so that the people may hear when I speak with you and may believe and trust in you forever.” Then Moses repeated the words of the people to the LORD.

10The LORD also said to Moses, “Go to the people and consecrate them today and tomorrow [that is, prepare them for My sacred purpose], and have them wash their clothes 11and be ready by the third day, because on the third day the LORD will come down on Mount Sinai [in the cloud] in the sight of all the people. 12You shall set barriers for the people all around [the mountain], saying, ‘Beware that you do not go up on the mountain or touch its border; whoever touches the mountain must be put to death. 13‘No hand shall touch him [that is, no one shall try to save the guilty party], but the offender must be stoned or shot through [with arrows]; whether man or animal [that touches the mountain], he shall not live.’ When the ram’s horn sounds a long blast, they shall come up to the mountain.” 14So Moses went down from the mountain to the people and sanctified them [for God’s sacred purpose], and they washed their clothes. 15He said to the people, “Be prepared for the third day; do not be intimate with a woman.”

16So it happened on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunder and flashes of lightning, and a thick cloud was on the mountain, and a very loud blast was sounded on a ram’s horn, so that all the people who were in the camp trembled. 17Then Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet God, and they stood and presented themselves at the foot of the mountain. The LORD Visits Sinai 18Mount Sinai was wrapped in smoke because the LORD descended upon it in fire; its smoke ascended like the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mountain quaked violently. 19And it happened, as the blast of the ram’s horn grew louder and louder, Moses spoke and God answered him with [a voice of] thunder. 20The LORD came down on Mount Sinai, to the top of the mountain; and the LORD called Moses to the top of the mountain, and he went up. 21Then the LORD spoke to Moses, “Go down, warn the people, so that they do not break through [the barriers around the mountain] to the LORD to see [Me], and many of them perish [as a result]. 22“Also have the priests who approach the LORD consecrate (sanctify, set apart) themselves [for My sacred purpose], or else the LORD will break forth [in judgment] against them [and destroy them].” 23Moses said to the LORD, “The people cannot come up to Mount Sinai, because You warned us, saying, ‘Set barriers around the mountain and consecrate it.’” 24Then the LORD said to him, “Go down and come up again, you and Aaron with you; but do not let the priests and the people break through [the barriers] to come up to the LORD, or He will break forth [in judgment] against them [and destroy them].” 25So Moses went down to the people and told them [again about God’s warning].

Exodus 20
The Ten Commandments

1Then God spoke all these words:

2“I am the LORD your God, who has brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.

3“You shall have no other gods before Me.

4“You shall not make for yourself any idol, or any likeness (form, manifestation) of what is in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the water under the earth [as an object to worship]. 5You shall not worship them nor serve them; for I, the LORD your God, am a jealous (impassioned) God [demanding what is rightfully and uniquely mine], visiting (avenging) the iniquity (sin, guilt) of the fathers on the children [that is, calling the children to account for the sins of their fathers], to the third and fourth generations of those who hate Me, 6but showing graciousness and steadfast lovingkindness to thousands [of generations] of those who love Me and keep My commandments.

7“You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain [that is, irreverently, in false affirmations or in ways that impugn the character of God]; for the LORD will not hold guiltless nor leave unpunished the one who takes His name in vain [disregarding its reverence and its power].

8“Remember the Sabbath (seventh) day to keep it holy (set apart, dedicated to God). 9Six days you shall labor and do all your work, 10but the seventh day is a Sabbath [a day of rest dedicated] to the LORD your God; on that day you shall not do any work, you or your son, or your daughter, or your male servant, or your female servant, or your livestock or the temporary resident (foreigner) who stays within your [city] gates. 11For in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth, the sea and everything that is in them, and He rested (ceased) on the seventh day. That is why the LORD blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy [that is, set it apart for His purposes].

12“Honor (respect, obey, care for) your father and your mother, so that your days may be prolonged in the land the LORD your God gives you.

13“You shall not commit murder (unjustified, deliberate homicide).

14“You shall not commit adultery.

15“You shall not steal [secretly, openly, fraudulently, or through carelessness].

16“You shall not testify falsely [that is, lie, withhold, or manipulate the truth] against your neighbor (any person).

17“You shall not covet [that is, selfishly desire and attempt to acquire] your neighbor’s house; you shall not covet your neighbor’s wife, or his male servant, or his female servant, or his ox, or his donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.”

18Now all the people witnessed the thunder and the flashes of lightning and the sound of the trumpet and the smoking mountain; and as they looked, the people were afraid, and they trembled [and moved backward] and stood at a [safe] distance. 19Then they said to Moses, “You speak to us and we will listen, but do not let God speak to us or we will die.” 20Moses said to the people, “Do not be afraid; for God has come in order to test you, and in order that the fear of Him [that is, a profound reverence for Him] will remain with you, so that you do not sin.” 21So the people stood at a [safe] distance, but Moses approached the thick cloud where God was.

22Then the LORD said to Moses, “Thus you shall say to the Israelites, ‘You have seen for yourselves that I have spoken to you from heaven. 23‘You shall not make other gods [to worship] besides Me; gods of silver or gods of gold, you shall not make [these lifeless idols] for yourselves. 24‘You shall make an altar of earth for Me, and sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your peace offerings, your sheep and your oxen. In every place where I cause My Name to be recorded and remembered [through revelation of My divine nature] I will come to you and bless you. 25‘If you make an altar of stone for Me, you shall not build it of cut stones, for if you use a chisel on it, you will profane it. 26‘Nor shall you go up to My altar on steps, so that your nakedness will not be exposed on it.’

Exodus 21
Ordinances For The People

1“Now these are the ordinances (laws) which you shall set before the Israelites:

2“If you purchase a Hebrew servant [because of his debt or poverty], he shall serve six years, and in the seventh [year] he shall leave as a free man, paying nothing. 3If he came [to you] alone, he shall leave alone; if he came married, then his wife shall leave with him. 4If his master gives him a wife, and she gives birth to sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall belong to her master, and he shall leave [your service] alone. 5But if the servant plainly says, ‘I love my master, my wife and my children; I will not leave as a free man,’ 6then his master shall bring him to God [that is, to the judges who act in God’s name], then he shall bring him to the door or doorpost. And his master shall pierce his ear with an awl (strong needle); and he shall serve him for life.

7“If a man sells his daughter to be a female servant, she shall not go free [after six years] as male servants do. 8If she does not please her master who has chosen her for himself [as a wife], he shall let her be redeemed [by her family]. He does not have the authority to sell her to a foreign people, because he has been unfair to her. 9If her master chooses her [as a wife] for his son, he shall act toward her as if she were legally his daughter. 10If her master marries another wife, he may not reduce her food, her clothing, or her privilege as a wife. 11If he does not do these three things for her, then shall she leave free, without payment of money.

Personal Injuries 12“Whoever strikes a man so that he dies must be put to death. 13However, if he did not lie in wait [for him], but God allowed him to fall into his hand, then I will establish for you a place to which he may escape [for protection until duly tried]. 14But if a man acts intentionally against another and kills him by [design through] treachery, you are to take him from My altar [to which he may have fled for protection], so that he may be put to death.

15“Whoever strikes his father or his mother must be put to death.

16“Whoever kidnaps a man, whether he sells him or is found with him in his possession, must be put to death.

17“Whoever curses his father or his mother or treats them contemptuously must be put to death.

18“If men quarrel and one strikes another with a stone or with his fist, and he does not die but is confined to bed, 19if he gets up and walks around leaning on his cane, then the one who struck him shall be left [physically] unpunished; he must only pay for his loss of time [at work], and the costs [of treatment and recuperation] until he is thoroughly healed.

20“If a man strikes his male or his female servant with a staff and the servant dies at his hand, he must be punished. 21If, however, the servant survives for a day or two, the offender shall not be punished, for the [injured] servant is his own property.

22“If men fight with each other and injure a pregnant woman so that she gives birth prematurely [and the baby lives], yet there is no further injury, the one who hurt her must be punished with a fine [paid] to the woman’s husband, as much as the judges decide. 23But if there is any further injury, then you shall require [as a penalty] life for life, 24eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, 25burn for burn, wound for wound, bruise for bruise.

26“If a man hits the eye of his male servant or female servant and it is destroyed, he must let the servant go free because of [the loss of] the eye. 27And if he knocks out the tooth of his male servant or female servant, he must let the servant go free because of [the loss of] the tooth.

28“If an ox gores a man or a woman to death, the ox must be stoned and its meat shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be cleared [of responsibility]. 29But if the ox has tried to gore on a previous occasion, and its owner has been warned, but has not kept it confined and it kills a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned and its owner shall be put to death as well. 30If a ransom is demanded of him [in return for his life], then he shall give whatever is demanded for the redemption of his life. 31If the ox has gored another’s son or daughter, he shall be dealt with according to this same rule. 32If the ox gores a male or a female servant, the owner shall give to the servant’s master thirty shekels of silver [the purchase price for a slave], and the ox shall be stoned.

33“If a man leaves a pit open, or digs a pit and does not cover it, and an ox or a donkey falls into it, 34the owner of the pit shall make restitution; he shall give money to the animal’s owner, but the dead [animal] shall be his.

35“If one man’s ox injures another’s so that it dies, then they shall sell the live ox and divide the proceeds equally; they shall also divide the dead ox [between them]. 36Or if it is known that the ox was previously in the habit of goring, and its owner has not kept it confined, he must make restitution of ox for ox, and the dead [animal] shall be his.

Exodus 22
Property Rights

1“If a man steals an ox or sheep and kills or sells it, he shall make restitution of five oxen for an ox or four sheep for a sheep.

2“If a thief is caught breaking in [after dark] and is struck [by the owner] so that he dies, there shall be no bloodguilt for him. 3But if the sun has risen, there will be bloodguilt for him. The thief [if he lives] must make [full] restitution; if he has nothing, then he shall be sold [as a slave to make restitution] for his theft. 4If the animal that he stole is found alive in his possession, whether it is ox or donkey or sheep, he shall pay double [for it].

5“If a man causes a field or vineyard to be grazed bare or lets his livestock loose so that it grazes in another man’s field, he shall make restitution from the best of his own field and the best of his own vineyard.

6“If fire breaks out and spreads to thorn bushes so that the stacked grain or standing grain or the field is consumed, he who started the fire shall make full restitution.

7“If a man gives his neighbor money or [other] goods to keep [for him while he is away] and it is stolen from the neighbor’s house, then, if the thief is caught, he shall pay double [for it]. 8If the thief is not caught, the owner of the house shall appear before the judges [who act in God’s name], to determine whether or not he had stolen his neighbor’s goods. 9For every offense involving property, whether it concerns ox, donkey, sheep, clothing, or any piece of lost property, which another identifies as his, the case of both parties shall come before the judges [who act in God’s name]. Whomever the judges pronounce guilty shall pay double to his neighbor.

10“If a man gives his neighbor a donkey or an ox or a sheep or any [other] animal to keep [for him], and it dies or is injured or taken away while no one is looking, 11then an oath before the LORD shall be made by the two of them that he has not taken his neighbor’s property; and the owner of it shall accept his word and not require him to make restitution. 12But if it is actually stolen from him [when in his care], he shall make restitution to its owner. 13If it is torn to pieces [by some predator or by accident], let him bring the mangled carcass as evidence; he shall not make restitution for what was torn to pieces.

14“And if a man borrows an animal from his neighbor, and it gets injured or dies while its owner is not with it, the borrower shall make full restitution. 15But if the owner is with it [when the damage is done], the borrower shall not make restitution. If it was hired, the damage is included in [the price of] its fee.

Various Laws 16“If a man seduces a virgin who is not betrothed, and lies with her, he must pay a dowry (marriage price) for her to be his wife. 17If her father absolutely refuses to give her to him, he must [still] pay money equivalent to the dowry of virgins.

18“You shall not allow a woman who practices sorcery to live.

19“Whoever lies with an animal must be put to death.

20“He who sacrifices to any god, other than to the LORD alone, shall be put under a ban (designated) for destruction (execution).

21“You shall not wrong a stranger or oppress him, for you were strangers in the land of Egypt. 22You shall not harm or oppress any widow or fatherless child. 23If you harm or oppress them in any way, and they cry at all to Me [for help], I will most certainly hear their cry; 24and My wrath shall be kindled and burn; I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall become widows and your children fatherless.

25“If you lend money to any one of My people with you who is poor, you shall not act as a creditor (professional moneylender) to him; you shall not charge him interest. 26If you ever take your [poor] neighbor’s robe in pledge, you must return it to him before sunset, 27for that is his only covering; it is his clothing for his body. In what shall he sleep? And when he cries to Me [for help], I will hear him, for I am compassionate and gracious.

28“You shall not curse God, nor curse the ruler of your people [since he administers God’s law].

29“You shall not delay the offering from your harvest and your vintage. You shall give (consecrate, dedicate) to Me the firstborn of your sons. 30You shall do the same with your oxen and with your sheep. It shall be with its mother for seven days; on the eighth day you shall give it [as an offering] to Me.

31“You shall be holy men to Me; therefore you shall not eat meat [from any animal] that has been torn to pieces [by predators] in the field; you shall throw it to the dogs.

Exodus 23
Various Laws

1“You shall not give a false report; you shall not join hands with the wicked to be a malicious witness [promoting wrong and violence]. 2You shall not follow a crowd to do [something] evil, nor shall you testify at a trial or in a dispute so as to side with a crowd in order to pervert justice; 3nor shall you favor or be partial to a poor man in his dispute [simply because he is poor].

4“If you meet your enemy’s ox or his donkey wandering off, you must bring it back to him. 5If you see the donkey of one who hates you lying helpless under its load, you shall not leave the man to deal with it [alone]; you must help him release the animal [from its burden].

6“You shall not pervert (bend) the justice due to your poor in his dispute. 7Keep far away from a false charge or action, and do not condemn to death the innocent or the righteous, for I will not justify and acquit the guilty.

8“You shall not accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds the clear-sighted and subverts the testimony and the cause of the righteous.

9“You shall not oppress a stranger, for you know the soul [the feelings, thoughts, and concerns] of a stranger, for you were strangers in Egypt.

The Sabbath and Land 10“You shall sow your land six years and harvest its yield, 11but the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie uncultivated, so that the poor among your people may eat [what the land grows naturally]; whatever they leave the animals of the field may eat. You shall do the same with your vineyard and olive grove.

12“Six days [each week] you shall do your work, but on the seventh day you shall stop [working] so that your ox and your donkey may settle down and rest, and the son of your female servant, as well as your stranger, may be refreshed. 13Now concerning everything which I have said to you, be on your guard; do not mention the name of other gods [either in a blessing or in a curse]; do not let such speech be heard [coming] from your mouth.

Three National Feasts 14“Three times a year you shall celebrate a feast [dedicated] to Me. 15You shall observe the Feast of Unleavened Bread; for seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the appointed time in the month of Abib, for in it you came out of Egypt. No one shall appear before Me empty-handed [but you shall bring sacrificial offerings]. 16Also [you shall observe] the Feast of Harvest (Weeks, Pentecost, or First Fruits), acknowledging the first fruits of your labor, of what you sow in the field. And [third] the Feast of Ingathering (Booths or Tabernacles) at the end of the year when you gather in [the fruit of] your labors from the field. 17Three times a year all your males shall appear before the Lord GOD.

18“You shall not offer the blood of My sacrifice with leavened bread; and the fat of My feast is not to be left overnight until morning.

19“You shall bring the choice first fruits of your ground into the house of the LORD your God.

“You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.

Conquest of the Land 20“Behold, I am going to send an Angel before you to keep and guard you on the way and to bring you to the place I have prepared. 21Be on your guard before Him, listen to and obey His voice; do not be rebellious toward Him or provoke Him, for He will not pardon your transgression, since My Name (authority) is in Him. 22But if you will indeed listen to and truly obey His voice and do everything that I say, then I will be an enemy to your enemies and an adversary to your adversaries. 23When My Angel goes before you and brings you to [the land of] the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, I will reject them and completely destroy them. 24You shall not bow down to worship their gods, nor serve them, nor do [anything] in accordance with their practices. You shall completely overthrow them and break down their [sacred] pillars and images [of pagan worship]. 25You shall serve [only] the LORD your God, and He shall bless your bread and water. I will also remove sickness from among you. 26No one shall suffer miscarriage or be barren in your land; I will fulfill the number of your days. 27I will send My terror ahead of you, and I will throw into confusion all the people among whom you come, and I will make all your enemies turn their backs to you [in flight]. 28I will send hornets ahead of you which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite before you. 29I will not drive them out before you in a single year, so that the land does not become desolate [due to lack of attention] and the [wild] animals of the field do not become too numerous for you. 30I will drive them out before you little by little, until you have increased and are strong enough to take possession of the land. 31I will establish your borders from the Red Sea to the Sea of the Philistines (the Mediterranean), and from the wilderness to the River Euphrates; for I will hand over the residents of the land to you, and you shall drive them out before you. 32You shall not make a covenant with them or with their gods. 33“They shall not live in your land, because they will make you sin against Me; for if you serve their gods, it is certain to be a trap for you [resulting in judgment].”

Exodus 24
People Affirm Their Covenant With God

1Then God said to Moses, “Come up to the LORD, you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu (Aaron’s older sons), and seventy of Israel’s elders, and you shall worship at a [safe] distance. 2“Moses alone shall approach the LORD, but the others shall not come near, nor shall the people come up with him.”

3Then Moses came and told the people everything that the LORD had said and all the ordinances. And all the people answered with one voice, “Everything the LORD has said we will do.” 4Moses wrote down all the words of the LORD. Then he got up early in the morning, and built an altar [for worship] at the foot of the mountain with twelve pillars (memorial stones) representing the twelve tribes of Israel. 5Then he sent young Israelite men, and they offered burnt offerings and sacrificed young bulls as peace offerings to the LORD. 6Moses took half of the blood and put it in large basins, and [the other] half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. 7Then he took the Book of the Covenant and read it aloud to the people; and they said, “Everything that the LORD has said we will do, and we will be obedient.” 8So Moses took the blood [which had been placed in the large basins] and sprinkled it on the people, and said, “Behold the blood of the covenant, which the LORD has made with you in accordance with all these words.”

9Then Moses, Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up [the mountainside], 10and they saw [a manifestation of] the God of Israel; and under His feet there appeared to be a pavement of sapphire, just as clear as the sky itself. 11Yet He did not stretch out His hand against the nobles of the Israelites; and they saw [the manifestation of the presence of] God, and ate and drank.

12Now the LORD said to Moses, “Come up to Me on the mountain and stay there, and I will give you the stone tablets with the law and the commandments which I have written for their instruction.” 13So Moses arose with Joshua his attendant, and he went up to the mountain of God. 14And he said to the elders, “Wait here for us until we come back to you. Remember that Aaron and Hur are with you; whoever has a legal matter, let him go to them.” 15Then Moses went up to the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain. 16The glory and brilliance of the LORD rested on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it for six days. On the seventh day God called to Moses from the midst of the cloud. 17In the sight of the Israelites the appearance of the glory and brilliance of the LORD was like consuming fire on the top of the mountain. 18Moses entered the midst of the cloud and went up the mountain; and he was on the mountain forty days and forty nights.

Exodus 25
Offerings For The Sanctuary

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Tell the children of Israel to take an offering for Me. From every man whose heart moves him [to give willingly] you shall take My offering. 3This is the offering you are to receive from them: gold, silver, and bronze, 4blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, fine twisted linen, goats’ hair, 5rams’ skins dyed red, porpoise skins, acacia wood, 6[olive] oil for lighting, balsam for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense, 7onyx stones and setting stones for the [priest’s] ephod and for the breastpiece. 8Have them build a sanctuary for Me, so that I may dwell among them. 9You shall construct it in accordance with everything that I am going to show you, as the pattern of the tabernacle and the pattern of all its furniture.

Ark of the Covenant 10“They shall make an ark of acacia wood two and a half cubits long, one and a half cubits wide, and one and a half cubits high. 11You shall overlay the ark with pure gold, overlay it inside and out, and you shall make a gold border (frame) around its top. 12You shall cast four gold rings for it and attach them to the four feet, two rings on either side. 13You shall make [carrying] poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold, 14and put the poles through the rings on the sides of the ark, by which to carry it. 15The poles shall remain in the rings of the ark; they shall not be removed from it [so that the ark itself need not be touched]. 16You shall put into the ark the Testimony (Ten Commandments) which I will give you.

17“You shall make a mercy seat (cover) of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and one and a half cubits wide. 18You shall make two cherubim (winged angelic figures) of [solid] hammered gold at the two ends of the mercy seat. 19Make one cherub at each end, making the cherubim of one piece with the mercy seat at its two ends. 20The cherubim shall have their wings spread upward, covering the mercy seat with their wings and facing each other. The faces of the cherubim are to be looking downward toward the mercy seat. 21You shall put the mercy seat on the top of the ark, and in the ark you shall put the Testimony which I will give you. 22There I will meet with you; from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubim which are on the ark of the Testimony, I will speak [intimately] with you regarding every commandment that I will give you for the Israelites.

The Table of Bread 23“You shall make a table of acacia wood, two cubits long, one cubit wide, and one and a half cubits high. 24You shall overlay it with pure gold and make a border of gold around the top of it. 25You shall make a rim of a hand width around it; you shall make a gold border for the rim around it. 26You shall make four gold rings for it and fasten them at the four corners that are on the table’s four legs. 27The rings shall be close against the rim as holders for the poles to carry the table. 28You shall make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold, so that the table may be carried with them. 29You shall make its plates [for the showbread] and its cups [for incense] and its pitchers and bowls for sacrificial drink offerings; you shall make them of pure gold. 30You shall set the bread of the Presence (showbread) on the table before Me at all times.

The Golden Lampstand 31“You shall make a lampstand of pure gold. The lampstand and its base and its shaft shall be made of hammered work; its cups, its calyxes and its flowers shall be all of one piece with it. 32Six branches shall come out of its sides; three branches of the lampstand out of the one side and three branches of the lampstand out of its other side [the shaft being the seventh branch]. 33Three cups shall be made like almond blossoms, each with a calyx and a flower on one branch, and three cups made like almond blossoms on the other branch with a calyx and a flower—so for the six branches coming out of the lampstand; 34and in the [center shaft of the] lampstand [you shall make] four cups shaped like almond blossoms, with their calyxes and their flowers. 35A calyx shall be under the first pair of branches coming out of it, and a calyx under the second pair of branches coming out of it, and a calyx under the third pair of branches coming out of it, for the six branches coming out of the lampstand. 36Their calyxes and their branches shall be of one piece with it; all of it shall be one piece of hammered work of pure gold. 37Then you shall make the lamps [of the lampstand] seven in number [with one lamp at the top of the shaft]. The priests shall set up its seven lamps so that they will light the space in front of it. 38Its snuffers and their trays shall be of pure gold. 39It shall be made from a talent (50-80 lbs.) of pure gold, including all these utensils. 40See that you make them [exactly] after their pattern which was shown to you on the mountain.

Exodus 26
Curtains Of Linen

1“Moreover, you shall make the tabernacle (sacred tent of worship) with ten [interior] curtains of fine twisted linen, and blue, purple, and scarlet fabric; you shall make them with [embroidered] cherubim, the handwork of a skillful craftsman. 2The length of each curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the width of each curtain four cubits; all of the curtains shall measure the same. 3The five curtains shall be joined to one another, and the other five curtains shall be joined to one another. 4You shall make loops of blue on the outer edge of the last curtain in the first set, and likewise in the second set. 5You shall make fifty loops on the one curtain, and fifty loops on the edge of the last curtain that is in the second set. The loops on one curtain correspond to the loops on the other. 6You shall make fifty gold hooks, and fasten the curtains together with the hooks; and the tabernacle shall be one unit.

Curtains of Goats’ Hair 7“Then you shall make [exterior] curtains of goats’ hair as a tent over the tabernacle. You shall make eleven curtains in all. 8Each curtain shall be thirty cubits long and four cubits wide. The eleven curtains shall all measure the same. 9You shall join five curtains by themselves and the other six curtains by themselves, and you shall double over the sixth curtain at the front of the tent [to make a closed door]. 10Make fifty loops on the edge of the outermost curtain in the first set, and fifty loops on the edge of the outermost curtain in the second set.

11“You shall make fifty bronze hooks and put the hooks into the loops and join the tent together so that it may be one unit. 12The overlapping part that is left over from the tent curtains, the half curtain that is left over, shall lap over the back of the tabernacle. 13The cubit on one side and the cubit on the other, of what is left over in the length of the curtains of the tent shall lap over the sides of the tabernacle on one side and the other side, to cover it. 14You shall make a third covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a fourth covering above that of porpoise skins.

Boards and Sockets 15“Then you shall make the boards for the tabernacle of acacia wood, standing upright [as a trellis-like frame]. 16The length of each board shall be ten cubits and the width of each board shall be one and a half cubits. 17Make two dovetails in each board for fitting [them] together; you shall do the same for all the tabernacle boards. 18You shall make the boards for the tabernacle [in the following quantities]: twenty boards for the south side. 19You shall make forty silver sockets under the twenty boards, two sockets under each board for its two dovetails, and two sockets under another board for its two dovetails; 20for the north side of the tabernacle there shall be twenty boards, 21and their forty silver sockets, two sockets under each board. 22For the back or west side of the tabernacle you shall make six boards. 23Make two boards for the corners of the tabernacle at the rear [on both sides]. 24They shall be joined together underneath, and joined together on top with one ring. So shall it be for both of them; they shall form the two [rear] corners. 25There shall be eight boards and sixteen silver sockets; two sockets under each board.

26“Then you shall make [fifteen] bars of acacia wood: five for the boards of one side of the tabernacle, 27and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the rear end of the tabernacle, for the back wall toward the west. 28And the middle bar in the center of the boards shall pass through [horizontally] from end to end. 29You shall overlay the boards with gold and make their rings of gold to hold the bars. You shall overlay the bars with gold. 30You shall erect the tabernacle according to its plan [the direction corresponding to its meaning and purpose] which has been shown to you on the mountain.

The Veil and Screen 31“You shall make a veil [to divide the two rooms] of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric and fine twisted linen, skillfully worked with cherubim on it. 32You shall hang it on four pillars (support poles) of acacia wood overlaid with gold, with gold hooks, on four silver sockets. 33You shall hang the veil from the hooks [that connect the curtains together], and you shall bring the ark of the Testimony there within the veil. The veil shall separate for you the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies. 34You shall put the mercy seat on the ark of the Testimony in the Holy of Holies. 35You shall set the table [for the bread] outside the veil [in the Holy Place] on the north side, and the lampstand opposite the table on the south side of the tabernacle.

36“You shall make a screen [to provide a covering] for the doorway of the tent of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric and finely woven [embroidered] linen, the work of an embroiderer. 37You shall make five pillars (support poles) of acacia wood to support the hanging curtain and overlay them with gold. Their hooks shall be of gold, and you shall cast five [base] sockets of bronze for them.

Exodus 27
The Bronze Altar

1“And you shall make the altar [for burnt offerings] of acacia wood, five cubits long and five cubits wide; the altar shall be square, and its height shall be three cubits. 2Make horns (horn-shaped projections) for it on its four corners; the horns shall be of one piece with it, and you shall overlay it with bronze. 3You shall make pots to remove its ashes, and shovels, basins [to catch the blood of the sacrificed animal], meat-forks, and firepans [to store live coals]. You shall make all its utensils of bronze. 4Also make a grate for it, a network of bronze; and on the grid you are to make four bronze rings at its four corners. 5And you shall put it under the ledge of the altar, so that the grid will extend halfway up the altar. 6You shall make [carrying] poles for the altar, poles of acacia wood, overlaid with bronze. 7The poles shall be inserted through the rings on the two sides of the altar so that it may be carried. 8You are to make the altar hollow with planks; as you were shown on the mountain [of Sinai], so shall it be made.

Court of the Tabernacle 9“You shall make the court of the tabernacle. The south side of the court is to have curtains of fine twisted linen, a hundred cubits long for one side; 10it shall have twenty pillars and twenty bronze sockets; but the hooks of the pillars and their fasteners shall be silver; 11likewise for the north side there shall be curtains, a hundred cubits long, and its twenty pillars and twenty bronze sockets; but the hooks of the pillars and their fasteners shall be silver. 12For the width of the court on the west side there shall be curtains of fifty cubits, with ten pillars (support poles) and ten sockets. 13The width of the court [to the front], on the east side shall be fifty cubits. 14The curtains for one side [of the gate] shall be fifteen cubits with three pillars and three sockets. 15On the other side [of the gate] the curtains shall be fifteen cubits with three pillars and three sockets. 16For the gate of the court there shall be a screen [to provide a covering] of twenty cubits, of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric and finely woven [embroidered] linen, the work of an embroiderer, with four pillars and four [base] sockets. 17All the pillars (support poles) around the court shall be joined together with silver rods; their hooks shall be of silver and their sockets of bronze. 18The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits, and the width fifty [cubits] throughout, and the height five cubits of fine twisted linen, and their sockets of bronze. 19All the tabernacle’s utensils and instruments used in all its service, and all its stakes, and all the stakes for the court, shall be of bronze.

20“You shall command the Israelites to provide you with clear oil of beaten olives for the light, to make a lamp burn continually [every night]. 21In the Tent of Meeting [of God with His people], outside the veil which is in front of the [ark of the] Testimony [and sets it apart], Aaron [the high priest] and his sons shall keep the lamp burning from evening to morning before the LORD. It shall be a perpetual statute [to be observed] throughout their generations on behalf of the Israelites.

Exodus 28
Garments Of The Priests

1“Now bring your brother Aaron near, and his sons with him from among the sons of Israel, so that he may serve as priest to Me—Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons. 2You are to make sacred garments [official clothing reserved for holy services] for Aaron your brother, for honor and for beauty (ornamentation). 3Tell all the skilled and talented people whom I have endowed with a spirit of wisdom, that they are to make Aaron’s garments to sanctify him and set him apart to serve as a priest for Me. 4These are the garments which they shall make: a breastpiece and an ephod [for the breastpiece] and a robe and a tunic of checkered work, a turban, and a sash. They shall make sacred garments for Aaron your brother and his sons, so that he may serve as a priest to Me. 5They are to use the gold and the blue and the purple and the scarlet fabric and fine twisted linen [from the people],

6and they shall make the ephod of gold and blue, purple, and scarlet fabric and fine twisted linen, skillfully woven and [beautifully] worked. 7It is to have two shoulder pieces joined to its two [back and front] ends, so that it may be joined together. 8And the skillfully woven sash, which is on the ephod shall be made of the same material: of gold, of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric and fine twisted linen. 9You shall take two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the [twelve] sons of Israel, 10six of their names on one stone and the remaining six names on the other stone, arranged in the order of their births. 11With the work of a jeweler, like the engravings of a signet, you shall engrave the two stones according to the names of the sons of Israel. You shall have them set in filigree [settings] of gold. 12You shall put the two stones on the [two] shoulder pieces of the ephod [of the high priest], as memorial stones for Israel; and Aaron shall bear their names on his two shoulders as a memorial before the LORD. 13You shall make filigree [settings] of gold, 14and you are to make two chains of pure gold like twisted cords, and fasten the corded chains to the settings.

15“You are to make a breastpiece of judgment, the work of a skilled and talented craftsman; like the work of the ephod you shall make it: of gold, of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric and of fine twisted linen. 16The breastpiece shall be square and folded double; a span [about nine inches] in length and a span in width. 17You shall mount on it four rows of stones: the first row shall be a row of ruby, topaz, and emerald; 18the second row a turquoise, a sapphire, and a diamond; 19the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 20and the fourth row a beryl and an onyx and a jasper; they shall be set in gold filigree. 21The [engraved] stones shall be twelve, according to the names of [the twelve tribes of] the sons of Israel; they shall be like the engravings of a signet, each with its name for the twelve tribes. 22You shall make for the breastpiece chains of pure gold twisted like cords. 23You shall make on the breastpiece two rings of gold, and shall put the two rings on the two ends of the breastpiece. 24You shall put the two twisted cords of gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the breastpiece. 25The other two ends of the two cords you shall fasten in the two filigree settings in front, putting them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod. 26You shall make two gold rings and put them at the two ends of the breastpiece, on its inside edge next to the ephod. 27You are to make two gold rings and attach them to the lower part of the two shoulder pieces of the ephod in front, close to the place where it is joined, above the skillfully woven sash of the ephod. 28They shall bind the breastpiece by its rings to the rings of the ephod with a blue cord, so that it will be above the skillfully woven sash of the ephod, so that the breastpiece will not come loose from the ephod. 29So Aaron shall carry the names of the sons of Israel (Jacob) in the breastpiece of judgment over his heart when he enters the Holy Place, to bring them in continual remembrance before the LORD. 30In the breastpiece of judgment you shall put the Urim (Lights) and the Thummim (Perfections) [to be used for determining God’s will in a matter]. They shall be over Aaron’s heart whenever he goes before the LORD, and Aaron shall always carry the judgment (verdict, judicial decisions) of the sons of Israel over his heart before the LORD.

31“And you shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue. 32There shall be an opening at its top in the center [for the head], with a binding of woven work around the opening, like the opening in a coat of armor, so that it will not tear or fray. 33You shall make pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric all around its hem, with gold bells between them; 34a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, all around the [bottom] hem of the robe. 35Aaron shall wear the robe when he ministers, and its sound shall be heard when he goes [alone] into the Holy Place before the LORD, and when he comes out, so that he will not die there.

36“You shall also make a plate of pure gold and engrave on it, like the engravings of a signet, ‘Holy to the LORD.’ 37You shall fasten it on the front of the turban with a blue cord. 38It shall be on Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron shall take away the guilt from the holy things which the sons of Israel dedicate, with regard to all their holy gifts. It shall always be on his forehead, so that they may be accepted before the LORD.

39“You shall weave the tunic of checkered work of fine linen, and make a turban of fine linen. You shall make a sash, the work of an embroiderer.

40“For Aaron’s sons you shall make tunics and sashes and [ornamental] caps, for glory and honor and beauty. 41You shall put the various articles of clothing on Aaron your brother and on his sons with him, and shall anoint them and ordain and sanctify them, so that they may serve Me as priests. 42You shall make for them [white] linen undergarments to cover their bare flesh, reaching from the waist to the thighs. 43The various articles of clothing shall be on Aaron and on his sons when they enter the Tent of Meeting, or when they approach the altar [of incense] to minister in the Holy Place, so that they do not incur guilt and die. It shall be a statute forever to Aaron and to his descendants after him.

Exodus 29
Consecration Of The Priests

1“This is what you shall do to consecrate Aaron and his sons so that they may serve Me as priests: take one young bull and two rams, without blemish, 2and unleavened bread and unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil; you shall make them of fine wheat flour. 3You shall put them in one basket, and present them in the basket along with the bull and the two rams. 4Then bring Aaron and his sons to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting [out where the basin is] and wash them with water. 5Then you shall take the garments, and put on Aaron the tunic and the robe of the ephod and the ephod and the breastpiece, and wrap him with the skillfully woven sash of the ephod; 6and you shall put the turban on his head and put the holy crown on the turban. 7Then you shall take the anointing oil and pour it on his head and anoint him. 8You shall bring his sons and put tunics on them. 9And you shall wrap them with sashes, Aaron and his sons, and put the [ornamental] caps on them; and the priest’s office shall be theirs by a perpetual statute. So you shall ordain Aaron and his sons.

The Sacrifices 10“Then you shall bring the bull before the Tent of Meeting, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the bull’s head. 11Then you shall kill the bull before the LORD by the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 12And you shall take some of the blood of the bull and with your finger put it on the horns of the altar [of burnt offering], and you shall pour out the remainder of the blood at the base of the altar. 13You shall take all the fat that covers the intestines and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, and offer them up in smoke on the altar. 14But the meat of the bull, its hide, and the contents of its intestines you shall burn in the fire outside the camp; it is a sin offering.

15“And you shall take one of the rams, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram; 16then you shall kill the ram and you shall take its blood and sprinkle it around the altar [of burnt offering]. 17Then you shall cut the ram into pieces, and wash its intestines and legs, and place them with its pieces and its head, 18and you shall burn the whole ram on the altar. It is a burnt offering to the LORD: it is a sweet and soothing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD.

19“Then you shall take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram. 20Then you shall kill the ram, and take some of its blood and put it on the tip of the right ears of Aaron and his sons and on the thumbs of their right hands and on the big toes of their right feet, and sprinkle the [rest of the] blood around on the altar [of burnt offering]. 21Then you shall take some of the blood that is on the altar and some of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it on Aaron and his garments and on his sons and their garments. Now Aaron and his garments and his sons and their garments shall be consecrated (dedicated, made holy, declared sacred for God’s purpose).

22“You shall also take the fat of the ram, the fat tail, the fat that covers the intestines, the lobe of the liver, the two kidneys with the fat that is on them, and the right thigh; (for it is a ram of ordination), 23and one loaf of bread and one cake of oiled bread and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before the LORD; 24and you shall put all these in the hands of Aaron and his sons, and wave them as a wave offering before the LORD. 25Then you shall take them from their hands, add them to the burnt offering, and burn them on the altar for a sweet and soothing aroma before the LORD; it is an offering by fire to the LORD.

26“Then you shall take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s ordination, and wave it as a wave offering before the LORD; and it shall be your (Moses) portion. 27You shall consecrate the waved breast offering [of the ram] used in the ordination and the waved thigh offering of the priests’ portion, since it is [a contribution] for Aaron and for his sons. 28It shall be for Aaron and his sons as their due portion from the Israelites forever, for it is a heave offering. It shall be a heave offering to the LORD from the Israelites from the sacrifices of their peace offerings.

29“The holy garments of Aaron shall be for his sons after him, to be anointed and ordained in them. 30That son who is [high] priest in his place shall put them on [each day for] seven days when he comes into the Tent of Meeting to minister in the Holy Place.

Food of the Priests 31“You shall take the ram of the ordination and boil its meat in a holy place. 32Aaron and his sons shall eat the meat of the ram and the bread in the basket, at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 33They shall eat those things by which atonement was made at their ordination and consecration; but a layman shall not eat them, because they are holy [that is, set apart to the worship of God]. 34And if any of the meat of ordination or the bread remains until morning, you shall burn it in the fire; it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.

35“So you shall do to Aaron and to his sons in accordance with all I have commanded you; during seven days you are to ordain them. 36You shall offer a bull every day as a sin offering for atonement. You shall cleanse the altar from sin when you make atonement for it, and you shall anoint it to consecrate it [for God’s sacred purpose]. 37For seven days you shall make atonement for the altar [of burnt offering] and consecrate it; then the altar shall be most holy. Whatever touches the altar must be holy (set apart for God’s service).

38“Now this is what you shall offer on the altar: two one year old lambs shall be offered each day, continuously. 39One lamb you shall offer in the morning and the other lamb at twilight; 40and with the one lamb there shall be one-tenth of a measure of fine flour mixed with one-fourth of a hin of beaten [olive] oil, and one-fourth of a hin of wine for a drink offering [to be poured out]. 41And the other lamb you shall offer at twilight, and do with it as with the grain offering of the morning and with the drink offering, for a sweet and soothing aroma [to appease God], an offering by fire to the LORD. 42This will be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting before the LORD, where I will meet with you, to speak to you there. 43There I will meet with the Israelites, and the Tent of Meeting shall be sanctified by My glory [the Shekinah, God’s dwelling presence]. 44I will sanctify the Tent of Meeting and the altar [of burnt offering]; also I will sanctify Aaron and his sons to serve as priests to Me. 45I will dwell among the sons of Israel and be their God. 46They shall know [from personal experience] and acknowledge that I am the LORD their God who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I might dwell among them; I am the LORD their God.

Exodus 30
The Altar Of Incense

1“You shall make an altar upon which to burn incense; you shall make it of acacia wood. 2It shall be a cubit long and a cubit wide. It shall be square and it shall be two cubits high. Its horns of one piece with it. 3You shall overlay it with pure gold, its top and its sides all around, and its horns; and you shall make a gold molding all around it. 4You shall make two gold rings under its molding, make them on the two side walls—on opposite sides—they shall be holders for the poles with which to carry it. 5You shall make the poles of acacia wood overlaid with gold. 6You shall put the altar of incense [in the Holy Place] in front and outside of the veil that screens the ark of the Testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the Testimony, where I will meet with you. 7Aaron shall burn sweet and fragrant incense on it; he shall burn it every morning when he trims and tends the lamps. 8When Aaron sets up the lamps at twilight, he shall burn incense, a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout your generations. 9You shall not offer any strange incense on this altar, or burnt offering or meal offering; you shall not pour out a drink offering on it. 10“Once a year Aaron shall make atonement [for sin] on its horns. He shall make atonement on it with the blood of the sin offering of atonement once a year throughout your generations. It is most holy to the LORD.”

The Ransom Money 11Then the LORD said to Moses, 12“When you take the census of the Israelites, each one shall give a ransom for himself to the LORD when you count them, so that no plague will come on them when you number them. 13This is what everyone who is counted shall give [as he joins those already counted]: a half shekel, according to the sanctuary shekel (the shekel is twenty gerahs); a half shekel as a contribution to the LORD. 14Everyone who is counted, from twenty years old and over, [as he joins those already counted], shall give this contribution to the LORD. 15The rich shall not give more and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when you give this contribution to the LORD to make atonement for yourselves. 16“You shall take the atonement money from the Israelites and use it [exclusively] for the service of the Tent of Meeting, so that it may be a memorial for the Israelites before the LORD, to make atonement for yourselves.”

The Bronze Basin 17Then the LORD said to Moses, 18“You shall also make a basin of bronze, with a base of bronze, for washing. You shall put it [outside in the court] between the Tent of Meeting and the altar [of burnt offering], and you shall put water in it. 19Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet. 20When they enter the Tent of Meeting, they shall wash with water, so that they will not die. Also, when they approach the altar to minister, to burn an offering in the fire to the LORD [they shall do the same]. 21“They shall wash their hands and their feet, so that they will not die; it shall be a perpetual statute for them, for Aaron and his descendants throughout their generations.”

The Anointing Oil 22Moreover, the LORD said to Moses, 23“Take for yourself the best spices: five hundred shekels of liquid myrrh, half as much—two hundred and fifty—of sweet-scented cinnamon, and two hundred and fifty of fragrant cane, 24and five hundred shekels of cinnamon blossom according to the sanctuary shekel, and a hin of olive oil. 25You shall make of these a holy anointing oil, a perfume mixture, the work of a perfumer; it shall be a sacred anointing oil. 26You shall anoint the Tent of Meeting with it, and the ark of the Testimony, 27and the table [for the bread] and all its utensils, and the lampstand and its utensils, and the altar of incense, 28and the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils, and the basin [for cleansing] and its base. 29You shall consecrate them, that they may be most holy; whatever touches them must be holy (set apart for God). 30You shall anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may serve as priests to Me. 31You shall say to the Israelites, ‘This shall be a holy and sacred anointing oil, to Me [alone] throughout your generations. 32‘It shall not be poured on anyone’s body, nor shall you make any like it in the same composition. It is holy, and it shall be sacred to you. 33‘Whoever prepares any like it or puts any of it on a layman shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them].’”

The Incense 34Then the LORD said to Moses, “Take sweet and fragrant spices—stacte, onycha, and galbanum, sweet and fragrant spices with pure frankincense; there shall be an equal amount of each— 35and make incense with it, a perfume, the work of a perfumer, salted, pure and sacred. 36You shall crush some of it [into a] very fine [powder], and put some of it before the Testimony in the Tent of Meeting, where I will meet with you; it shall be most holy to you. 37The incense which you shall make, you shall not make in the same proportions for yourselves; it shall be holy to you for the LORD. 38“Whoever makes any like it, to use as perfume shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them].”

Exodus 31
The Skilled Craftsmen

1Now the LORD said to Moses, 2“See, I have called by name Bezalel, son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. 3I have filled him with the Spirit of God in wisdom and skill, in understanding and intelligence, in knowledge, and in all kinds of craftsmanship, 4to make artistic designs for work in gold, in silver, and in bronze, 5and in the cutting of stones for settings, and in the carving of wood, to work in all kinds of craftsmanship. 6And behold, I Myself have appointed with him Oholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; to all who are wise-hearted I have given the skill and ability to make everything that I have commanded you: 7the Tent of Meeting, the ark of the Testimony, the mercy seat that is upon it, all the furnishings of the tent— 8the table [for the bread] and its utensils, the pure gold lampstand with all its utensils, the [golden] altar of incense, 9the [bronze] altar of burnt offering with all its utensils, the basin and its base— 10the finely worked garments, the holy garments for Aaron the [high] priest and the garments for his sons to minister as priests, 11and the anointing oil and the sweet and fragrant incense for the Holy Place. They are to make them according to all that I have commanded you.”

The Sign of the Sabbath 12And the LORD said to Moses, 13“But as for you, say to the Israelites, ‘You shall most certainly observe My Sabbaths, for it is a sign between Me and you throughout your generations, so that you may know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that I am the LORD who sanctifies you and sets you apart [for Myself]. 14‘Therefore, you shall keep the Sabbath, for it is holy to you. Everyone who profanes it must be put to death; for whoever does work on the Sabbath, that person (soul) shall be cut off from among his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 15‘For six days work may be done, but the seventh is the Sabbath of complete rest, sacred to the LORD; whoever does work on the Sabbath day must be put to death. 16‘So the Israelites shall observe the Sabbath, to celebrate the Sabbath throughout their generations as a perpetual covenant.’ 17“It is a sign between Me and the Israelites forever; for in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day He ceased and was refreshed.”

18When He had finished speaking with him on Mount Sinai, He gave Moses the two tablets of the Testimony, tablets of stone, written with the finger of God.

Exodus 32
The Golden Calf

1Now when the people saw that Moses delayed coming down from the mountain, they gathered together before Aaron and said to him, “Come, make us a god who will go before us; as for this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.” 2So Aaron replied to them, “Take off the gold rings that are in the ears of your wives, your sons and daughters, and bring them to me.” 3So all the people took off the gold rings that were in their ears and brought them to Aaron. 4And he took the gold from their hands, and fashioned it with an engraving tool and made it into a molten calf; and they said, “This is your god, O Israel, who brought you up from the land of Egypt.” 5Now when Aaron saw the molten calf, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made a proclamation, and said, “Tomorrow shall be a feast to the LORD!” 6So they got up early the next day and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; then the people sat down to eat and drink, and got up to play [shamefully—without moral restraint].

7Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go down at once, for your people, whom you brought up from the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves. 8“They have quickly turned aside from the way which I commanded them. They have made themselves a molten calf, and have worshiped it and sacrificed to it, and said, ‘This is your god, O Israel, who brought you up from the land of Egypt!’” 9The LORD said to Moses, “I have seen this people, and behold, they are a stiff-necked (stubborn, rebellious) people. 10“Now therefore, let Me alone and do not interfere, so that My anger may burn against them and that I may destroy them; and I will make of you (your descendants) a great nation.”

Moses’ Entreaty 11But Moses appeased and entreated the LORD his God, and said, “LORD, why does Your anger burn against Your people whom You have brought out of the land of Egypt with great power and a mighty hand? 12Why should the Egyptians say, ‘With evil [intent] their God brought them out to kill them in the mountains and destroy them from the face of the earth’? Turn away from Your burning anger and change Your mind about harming Your people. 13“Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel (Jacob), Your servants to whom You swore [an oath] by Yourself, and said to them, ‘I will multiply your descendants as the stars of the heavens, and all this land of which I have spoken I will give to your descendants, and they shall inherit it forever.’” 14So the LORD changed His mind about the harm which He had said He would do to His people.

15Then Moses turned and went down from the mountain with the two tablets of the Testimony in his hand; tablets that were written on both sides—they were written on one side and on the other. 16The tablets were the work of God; the writing was the writing of God engraved on the tablets. 17Now when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said to Moses, “There is a sound of battle in the camp.” 18But Moses said,
“It is not the sound of the cry of victory,
Nor is it the sound of the cry of defeat;
But I hear the sound of singing.”
Moses’ Anger 19And as soon as he approached the camp and he saw the calf and the dancing, Moses’ anger burned; and he threw the tablets from his hands and smashed them at the foot of the mountain. 20Then Moses took the calf they had made and burned it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and scattered it on the surface of the water and made the Israelites drink it.

21Then Moses said to Aaron, “What did this people do to you, that you have brought so great a sin on them?” 22Aaron said, “Do not let the anger of my lord burn; you know the people yourself, that they are prone to evil. 23For they said to me, ‘Make us a god who will go before us; as for this Moses, the man who brought us out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.’ 24“I said to them, ‘Let whoever has gold [jewelry], take it off.’ So they gave it to me; then I threw it into the fire, and out came this calf.”

25Now when Moses saw that the people were out of control—for Aaron had let them get out of control to the point of being an object of mockery among their enemies— 26then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, “Whoever is on the LORD’S side, come to me!” And all the sons of Levi [the priestly tribe] gathered together to him. 27He said to them, “Thus says the LORD God of Israel, ‘Every man strap his sword on his thigh and go back and forth from gate to gate throughout the camp, and every man kill his brother, and every man his friend, and every man his neighbor [all who continue pagan worship].’” 28So the sons of Levi did as Moses instructed, and about three thousand men of the people [of Israel] were killed that day. 29Then Moses said [to the Levites], “Dedicate yourselves today to the LORD—for each man has been against his own son and his own brother [in his attempt to escape execution]—so that He may restore and bestow His blessing on you this day.”

30Then the next day Moses said to the people, “You have committed a great sin. Now I will go up to the LORD; perhaps I can make atonement for your sin.” 31So Moses returned to the LORD, and said, “Oh, these people have committed a great sin [against You], and have made themselves a god of gold. 32“Yet now, if You will, forgive their sin—and if not, please blot me out of Your book which You have written (kill me)!” 33But the LORD said to Moses, “Whoever has sinned against Me, I will blot him out of My book [not you]. 34“But now go, lead the people [to the place] where I have told you. Behold, My Angel shall go before you; nevertheless, in the day when I punish, I will punish them for their sin!” 35So the LORD struck the people with a plague, because of what they had done with the calf which Aaron had made [for them].

Exodus 33
The Journey Resumed

1The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, “Depart, go up from here, you and the people whom you have brought from the land of Egypt, to the land which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Israel), saying, ‘To your descendants I will give it.’ 2I will send an Angel before you and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. 3“Go up to a land [of abundance] flowing with milk and honey; for I will not go up in your midst, because you are a stiff-necked (stubborn, rebellious) people, and I might destroy you on the way.”

4When the people heard this sad word, they mourned, and none of them put on his ornaments. 5For the LORD had said to Moses, “Say to the sons of Israel, ‘You are a stiff-necked (stubborn, rebellious) people! If I should come among you for one moment, I would destroy you. Now therefore, [penitently] take off your ornaments, so that I may know what to do with you.’” 6So the Israelites left off all their ornaments [in repentance], from Mount Horeb (Sinai) onward.

7Now Moses used to take his own tent and pitch it outside the camp, far away from the camp, and he called it the tent of meeting [of God with His own people]. And everyone who sought the LORD would go out to the [temporary] tent of meeting which was outside the camp. 8Whenever Moses went out to the tent, all the people would rise and stand, each at his tent door, and look at Moses until he entered the tent. 9Whenever Moses entered the tent, the pillar of cloud would descend and stand at the doorway of the tent; and the LORD would speak with Moses. 10When all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the tent door, all the people would rise and worship, each at his tent door. 11And so the LORD used to speak to Moses face to face, just as a man speaks to his friend. When Moses returned to the camp, his attendant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, would not depart from the tent.

Moses Intercedes 12Moses said to the LORD, “See, You say to me, ‘Bring up this people,’ but You have not let me know whom You will send with me. Yet You have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have also found favor in My sight.’ 13“Now therefore, I pray you, if I have found favor in Your sight, let me know Your ways so that I may know You [becoming more deeply and intimately acquainted with You, recognizing and understanding Your ways more clearly] and that I may find grace and favor in Your sight. And consider also, that this nation is Your people.” 14And the LORD said, “My presence shall go with you, and I will give you rest [by bringing you and the people into the promised land].” 15And Moses said to Him, “If Your presence does not go [with me], do not lead us up from here. 16“For how then can it be known that Your people and I have found favor in Your sight? Is it not by Your going with us, so that we are distinguished, Your people and I, from all the [other] people on the face of the earth?”

17The LORD said to Moses, “I will also do this thing that you have asked; for you have found favor (lovingkindness, mercy) in My sight and I have known you [personally] by name.” 18Then Moses said, “Please, show me Your glory!” 19And God said, “I will make all My goodness pass before you, and I will proclaim the Name of the LORD before you; for I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show compassion (lovingkindness) on whom I will show compassion.” 20But He said, “You cannot see My face, for no man shall see Me and live!” 21Then the LORD said, “Behold, there is a place beside Me, and you shall stand there on the rock; 22and while My glory is passing by, I will put you in a cleft of the rock and protectively cover you with My hand until I have passed by. 23“Then I will take away My hand and you shall see My back; but My face shall not be seen.”

Exodus 34
The Two Tablets Replaced

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “Cut two tablets of stone like the first, and I will write on these tablets the words that were on the first tablets which you smashed [when you learned of Israel’s idolatry]. 2So be ready by morning, and come up in the morning to Mount Sinai, and present yourself there to Me on the top of the mountain. 3“No man is to come up with you, nor let any man be seen anywhere on the mountain; nor let flocks or herds feed in front of that mountain.” 4So Moses cut two tablets of stone like the first ones, and he got up early in the morning and went up on Mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took the two tablets of stone in his hand. 5Then the LORD descended in the cloud and stood there with Moses as he proclaimed the Name of the LORD. 6Then the LORD passed by in front of him, and proclaimed, “The LORD, the LORD God, compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in lovingkindness and truth (faithfulness); 7keeping mercy and lovingkindness for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin; but He will by no means leave the guilty unpunished, visiting (avenging) the iniquity (sin, guilt) of the fathers upon the children and the grandchildren to the third and fourth generations [that is, calling the children to account for the sins of their fathers].” 8Moses bowed to the earth immediately and worshiped [the Lord]. 9And he said, “If now I have found favor and lovingkindness in Your sight, O Lord, let the Lord, please, go in our midst, though it is a stiff-necked (stubborn, rebellious) people, and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us as Your possession.”

The Covenant Renewed 10Then God said, “Behold, I am going to make a covenant. Before all your people I will do wondrous works (miracles) such as have not been created or produced in all the earth nor among any of the nations; and all the people among whom you live shall see the working of the LORD, for it is a fearful and awesome thing that I am going to do with you.

11“Be sure to observe what I am commanding you this day: behold, I am going to drive out the Amorite before you, and the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. 12Watch yourself so that you do not make a covenant (solemn agreement, treaty) with the inhabitants of the land into which you are going, or it will become a [dangerous] trap among you. 13But you shall tear down and destroy their [pagan] altars, smash in pieces their [sacred] pillars (obelisks, images) and cut down their Asherim 14—for you shall not worship any other god; for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous (impassioned) God [demanding what is rightfully and uniquely His]— 15otherwise you might make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land and they would play the prostitute with their gods and sacrifice to their gods, and someone might invite you to eat his sacrifice (meal), 16and you might take some of his daughters for your sons, and his daughters would play the prostitute with their gods and cause your sons also to play the prostitute (commit apostasy) with their gods [that is, abandon the true God for man-made idols]. 17You shall make for yourselves no molten gods.

18“You shall observe the Feast of Unleavened Bread (Passover). For seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I have commanded you, at the appointed time in the month of Abib; for in the month of Abib you came out of Egypt.

19“All the firstborn males among your livestock belong to Me, whether cattle or sheep. 20You shall redeem the firstborn of a donkey with a lamb; but if you do not redeem it, then you shall break its neck. You shall redeem all the firstborn of your sons. None of you are to appear before Me empty-handed.

21“You shall work for six days, but on the seventh day you shall rest; [even] in plowing time and in harvest you shall rest [on the Sabbath]. 22You shall observe and celebrate the Feast of Weeks (Harvest, First Fruits, or Pentecost), the first fruits of the wheat harvest, and the Feast of Ingathering (Booths or Tabernacles) at the year’s end. 23Three times a year all your males shall appear before the Lord GOD, the God of Israel. 24For I will drive out and dispossess nations before you and enlarge your borders; nor shall any man covet (actively seek for himself) your land when you go up to appear before the LORD your God three times a year.

25“You shall not offer the blood of My sacrifice with leavened bread, nor shall the sacrifice of the Feast of the Passover (Unleavened Bread) be left over until morning.

26“You shall bring the very first of the first fruits of your ground to the house of the LORD your God.

“You shall not boil a young goat in his mother’s milk [as some pagans do].”

27Then the LORD said to Moses, “Write these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.” 28Moses was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he ate no bread and drank no water. And he wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the Ten Commandments.

Moses’ Face Shines 29When Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of the Testimony in his hand, he did not know that the skin of his face was shining [with a unique radiance] because he had been speaking with God. 30When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone, and they were afraid to approach him. 31But Moses called to them, and Aaron and all the leaders of the congregation returned to him; and he spoke to them. 32Afterward all the Israelites approached him, and he commanded them to do everything that the LORD had said to him on Mount Sinai. 33When Moses had finished speaking with them, he put a veil over his face. 34But whenever Moses went in before the LORD to speak with Him, he would take off the veil until he came out. When he came out and he told the Israelites what he had been commanded [by God], 35the Israelites would see the face of Moses, how his skin shone [with a unique radiance]. So Moses put the veil on his face again until he went in to speak with God.

Exodus 35
The Sabbath Emphasized

1Moses gathered all the congregation of the sons of Israel together, and said to them, “These are the things which the LORD has commanded you to do:

2“For six days work may be done, but the seventh day shall be a holy day for you, a Sabbath of complete rest to the LORD; whoever does any kind of work on that day shall be put to death. 3“You shall not kindle a fire in any of your dwellings on the Sabbath day.”

4And Moses said to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, “This is the thing which the LORD has commanded: 5‘Take from among you an offering to the LORD. Whoever has a willing heart, let him bring it as the LORD’S offering: gold, silver, and bronze, 6blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, fine linen, goats’ hair, 7and rams’ skins dyed red, and skins of porpoises, and acacia wood, 8and [olive] oil for the lighting, and balsam for the anointing oil, and for the fragrant incense, 9and onyx stones and other stones to be set for the ephod and the breastpiece.

Tabernacle Workmen 10‘Let every skilled and talented man among you come, and make everything that the LORD has commanded: 11the tabernacle (sacred dwelling of God), its tent and its covering, its hooks, its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its sockets; 12the ark [of the covenant] and its carrying poles, with the mercy seat and the veil (partition curtain) of the screen [to hang between the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies]; 13the table and its carrying poles, and all its utensils, and the bread of the [divine] Presence (showbread); 14the lampstand also for the light and its utensils and its lamps, and the oil for the light; 15and the altar of incense and its carrying poles, the anointing oil and the fragrant incense, the screen (curtain) for the doorway at the entrance of the tabernacle; 16the altar of burnt offering with its bronze grating, its carrying poles, and all its utensils, the wash basin and its base (stand); 17the court’s curtains, its support poles and their sockets, and the curtain for the gate of the courtyard; 18the pegs of the tabernacle and the pegs of the court and their cords; 19the finely-woven garments for ministering in the Holy Place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons, to minister as priests.’”

Gifts Received 20Then all the congregation of the Israelites left Moses’ presence. 21Everyone whose heart stirred him and everyone whose spirit moved him came and brought the LORD’S offering to be used for the Tent of Meeting, for all its service, and for the holy garments. 22Then all whose hearts moved them, both men and women, came and brought brooches, earrings or nose rings, signet rings, and necklaces, all jewels of gold; everyone bringing an offering of gold to the LORD. 23Every man who had in his possession blue or purple or scarlet fabric, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, and rams’ skins dyed red and porpoise skins, brought them. 24Everyone who could make an offering of silver or bronze brought it as the LORD’S offering; every man who had in his possession acacia wood for any work of the service brought it. 25All the skilled and talented women spun thread with their hands, and brought what they had spun, blue and purple and scarlet fabric and fine linen. 26All the women whose heart stirred with a skill spun the goats’ hair. 27The leaders brought onyx stones and other stones to be put in settings for the ephod and for the breastpiece, 28and spice and [olive] oil for the light and for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense. 29The Israelites, all the men and women whose heart moved them to bring material for all the work which the LORD had commanded through Moses to be done, brought a freewill (voluntary) offering to the LORD.

30Then Moses said to the Israelites, “See, the LORD called by name Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah; 31and He has filled him with the Spirit of God, with wisdom and skill, with intelligence and understanding, and with knowledge in all [areas of] craftsmanship, 32to devise artistic designs to work in gold, silver, and bronze, 33and in the cutting of stones for setting and in the carving of wood, for work in every skilled craft. 34He has also put in Bezalel’s heart [the willingness] to teach [others the same skills], both he and Oholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. 35He has filled them with skill to do the work of an engraver, of a designer, and of an embroiderer, in blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and in fine linen, and of a weaver; makers of every work and embroiderers of [excellent] designs.

Exodus 36
The Tabernacle Underwritten

1“Bezalel and Oholiab, and every skilled person in whom the LORD has put ability and understanding to know how to do all the work in the construction of the sanctuary, shall work according to all that the LORD has commanded.”

2So Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab and every skilled person in whom the LORD had put ability, everyone whose heart stirred him, to come to do the work. 3They received from Moses all the offerings which the Israelites had brought for the construction of the sanctuary, to prepare it for service. And they continued to bring him freewill (voluntary) offerings every morning. 4And all the skilled men who were doing all the work on the sanctuary came, each one from the work which he was doing, 5and they said to Moses, “The people are bringing much more than enough for the construction work which the LORD commanded us to do.” 6So Moses issued a command, and it was proclaimed throughout the camp, “Let neither man nor woman do any more work for the sanctuary offering.” So the people were restrained from bringing anything more; 7for the material they had was sufficient and more than enough to do all the work.

Construction Proceeds 8All the skilled men among them who were doing the work on the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twisted linen and blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, with cherubim [worked into them], the work of an embroiderer, Bezalel made them. 9Each curtain was twenty-eight cubits long and four cubits wide; all the curtains were one size. 10Bezalel joined five curtains one to another, and [the other] five curtains he joined one to another. 11He made loops of blue on the edge of the outermost curtain in the first set; he also did this on the edge of the curtain that was outermost in the second set. 12He made fifty loops in the one curtain [of the first set] and fifty loops on the edge of the curtain which was in the second set; the loops were opposite one another. 13He made fifty gold hooks and joined the curtains together with the hooks, so that the tabernacle became a unit.

14Then he made curtains of goats’ hair for a tent over the tabernacle; he made eleven curtains in all. 15Each curtain was thirty cubits long and four cubits wide; the eleven curtains were of equal size. 16Bezalel joined five curtains by themselves and [the other] six curtains by themselves. 17He made fifty loops on the edge of the outermost curtain in the first set, and he made fifty loops on the edge of the outermost curtain of the second set. 18He made fifty bronze hooks to join the tent together into a unit. 19He made a [third] covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and above it a [fourth] covering of porpoise skins.

20Bezalel made boards of acacia wood for the upright framework of the tabernacle. 21Each board was ten cubits long and one and a half cubits wide. 22Each board had two tenons (dovetails), fitted to one another; he did this for all the boards of the tabernacle. 23And [this is how] he made the boards [for frames] for the tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side; 24and he made under the twenty boards forty silver sockets; two sockets under one board for its two tenons (dovetails), and two sockets under another board for its two tenons. 25For the other side of the tabernacle, the north side, he made twenty boards, 26and their forty silver sockets; two sockets under [the end of] each board. 27And for the rear of the tabernacle, to the west, he made six [frame] boards. 28And he made two boards for each corner of the tabernacle in the rear. 29They were separate below, but linked together at the top with one ring; thus he made both of them in both corners. 30There were eight boards with sixteen silver sockets, and under [the end of] each board two sockets.

31Bezalel made bars of acacia wood, five for the [frame] boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 32and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle’s other side, and five bars for the boards at the rear side to the west. 33And he made the middle bar pass through [horizontally] halfway up the boards from one end to the other. 34He overlaid the boards and the bars with gold and made their rings of gold as holders for the bars.

35Further, Bezalel made the veil of blue and purple and scarlet fabric, and fine twisted linen; he made it with cherubim, the work of an embroiderer. 36For the veil (partition curtain) he made four support poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold; their hooks were gold, and he cast for them four silver sockets. 37He made a screen (curtain) for the doorway of the tent, of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and fine twisted linen, the work of an embroiderer; 38and [he made] the five support poles with their hooks, and overlaid their [ornamental] tops and connecting rings with gold; but their five sockets were bronze.

Exodus 37
Construction Continues

1Bezalel made the ark [of the covenant] of acacia wood—it was two and a half cubits long, and one and a half cubits wide, and one and a half cubits high. 2And he overlaid it with pure gold inside and out, and made a molding (border) of gold to go all around [the top of it]. 3He cast four rings of gold for it on its four feet, two rings on one side and two rings on the other side. 4He made carrying poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. 5He put the carrying poles through the rings at the sides of the ark, to carry it. 6Bezalel made the mercy seat of pure gold; it was two and a half cubits long, and one and a half cubits wide. 7He made two cherubim of hammered gold; he made them at the two ends of the mercy seat, 8one cherub at one end and one cherub at the other end; he made the cherubim [of one piece] with the mercy seat at the two ends. 9The cherubim spread out their wings upward, covering and protecting the mercy seat with their wings, with their faces toward each other; the faces of the cherubim were [looking downward] toward the mercy seat.

10Bezalel made the table [for the bread] of acacia wood; it was two cubits long, a cubit wide, and one and a half cubits high. 11He overlaid it with pure gold, and made a border of gold for it all around [its top]. 12He made a rim for it [just under the top] a hand width wide all around, and a border of gold around its rim. 13He cast four rings of gold for it and fastened the rings to the four corners that were at its four legs. 14Close by the rim were the rings, the holders for the poles [to pass through] to carry the table. 15Bezalel made the carrying poles of acacia wood to carry the table and overlaid them with gold. 16He made the utensils which were to be on the table, its dishes and its pans [for bread], its bowls and its jars for pouring drink offerings, of pure gold.

17Then he made the lampstand (menorah) of pure gold. He made the lampstand of hammered work, its base and its [center] shaft; its cups, its calyxes, and its flowers were all of one piece with it. 18There were six branches coming out of the sides of the lampstand, three branches from one side of the center shaft and three branches from the other side of it; 19three cups shaped like almond blossoms, a calyx and a flower in one branch, and three cups shaped like almond blossoms, a calyx and a flower in the opposite branch—so for the six branches coming out of the center shaft of the lampstand. 20On the center shaft of the lampstand there were four cups shaped like almond blossoms, with calyxes and flowers [one at the top]; 21and a calyx was under the first pair of branches coming out of it, and a calyx under the second pair of branches, coming out of it, and a calyx under the third pair of branches coming out of it, for the six branches coming out of the lampstand. 22Their calyxes and their branches were of one piece with it; all of it was a single hammered work of pure gold. 23He made its seven lamps with its snuffers and its trays of pure gold. 24He made the lampstand and all its utensils from a talent of pure gold.

25Then Bezalel made the incense altar of acacia wood; its top was a cubit square and it was two cubits high; the horns were of one piece with it. 26He overlaid it with pure gold, its top, its sides all around and its horns; he also made a rim of gold around it. 27He made two rings of gold for it under its rim, on its two opposite sides, as holders for the poles [to pass through] to carry it. 28He made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. 29He also made the holy anointing oil and the pure, fragrant incense of spices, the work of a perfumer.

Exodus 38
The Tabernacle Completed

1Then Bezalel made the altar of burnt offering of acacia wood; its top was square, five cubits long and five cubits wide, and three cubits high. 2And he made its horns (horn-shaped projections) on the four corners of it; the horns were of one piece with it, and he overlaid it with bronze. 3He made all the utensils and vessels of the altar [of burnt offering], the pots, shovels, basins [to catch the blood of the sacrificed animal], meat hooks and the firepans [to store live coals]. He made all its utensils of bronze. 4He made for the altar a grating of bronze mesh under its rim, extending halfway up it. 5He cast four rings for the four corners of the bronze grating as holders for the carrying poles. 6And he made the carrying poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with bronze. 7He put the poles through the rings on the sides of the altar, with which to carry it; he made it hollow with planks.

8Bezalel made the basin and its base of bronze from the mirrors of the attending women who served and ministered at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting.

9Then he made the court: for the south side the curtains of the court were of fine twisted linen, a hundred cubits; 10their twenty support poles, and their twenty bronze sockets; the hooks of the support poles and their connecting rings were silver. 11And for the north side [of the court the curtains were also] a hundred cubits; their twenty support poles and their twenty bronze sockets; the hooks of the support poles and their connecting rings were silver. 12For the west side [of the court] there were curtains of fifty cubits with their ten support poles and their ten sockets; the hooks of the support poles and their connecting rings were silver. 13For the east side [the front of the courtyard, there were curtains of] fifty cubits. 14The curtains for one side of the court gate were fifteen cubits, with their three support poles and their three sockets; 15and the same for the other side [of the court gate]. Left and right of the court gate there were curtains of fifteen cubits; with their three support poles and their three sockets. 16All the curtains around the court were of fine twisted linen. 17The sockets for the support poles were made of bronze, the hooks of the support poles and their connecting rings were made of silver; and silver overlaid their tops. All the support poles of the court had silver connecting rings. 18The screen (curtain) for the gate of the courtyard [on the east side] was the work of an embroiderer, in blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and fine twisted linen; it was twenty cubits long and five cubits high, corresponding to the curtains of the court. 19Their four support poles and their four sockets were bronze; their hooks were silver, and silver overlaid their tops and their connecting rings. 20All the pegs for the tabernacle and the court were bronze.

The Cost of the Tabernacle 21This is the sum of the things for the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the Testimony, as counted according to the command of Moses, for the work of the Levites, under the direction of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. 22Now Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made everything that the LORD commanded Moses. 23With him was Oholiab the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver and a skillful craftsman and an embroiderer in blue and in purple and in scarlet fabric, and in fine linen.

24All the gold that was used for the work, in all the building and furnishing of the sanctuary, the gold from the wave offering, was twenty-nine talents and seven hundred and thirty shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. 25The silver from those of the congregation who were assembled and counted was 100 talents and 1,775 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary; 26a beka for each man (that is, half a shekel according to the shekel of the sanctuary) for everyone who was counted, from twenty years old and upward, for 603,550 men. 27The hundred talents of silver were for casting the sockets of the sanctuary and the sockets of the veil (partition curtain); a hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket. 28Of the 1,775 shekels, he made hooks for the support poles and overlaid their tops and made connecting rings for them. 29The bronze of the wave offering was seventy talents and 2,400 shekels. 30With it Bezalel made the sockets for the doorway of the Tent of Meeting, and the bronze altar and its bronze grating, and all the utensils of the altar, 31and the sockets of the court all around and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pegs of the tabernacle and all the pegs around the court.

Exodus 39
The Priestly Garments

1Moreover, from the blue and purple and scarlet fabric, they made finely woven garments for serving and ministering in the Holy Place; they made the holy garments for Aaron, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

2Bezalel made the ephod of gold, and of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and fine twisted linen. 3Then Bezalel and Oholiab hammered the gold [into thin sheets] and cut it into threads to work into the blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and into the fine linen, the work of a skilled craftsman. 4They made attaching shoulder pieces for the ephod; it was attached at its two [upper] edges. 5The skillfully woven sash with which to bind it, which was on the ephod [to hold it in place], was like its workmanship, of the same material: of gold and of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and fine twisted linen, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

6They made the onyx stones, set in settings of gold filigree; they were engraved as signets are engraved, with the names of [the twelve tribes of] the sons of Israel. 7And he put them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod to be memorial stones (a remembrance) for the sons of Israel (Jacob), just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

8Bezalel made the breastpiece, the work of a skillful craftsman, like the workmanship of the ephod: of gold and of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and fine twisted linen. 9It was square; they made the breastpiece folded double, a [hand’s] span long and a [hand’s] span wide when folded double. 10And they mounted four rows of stones on it. The first row was a row of ruby, topaz, and emerald; 11and the second row, a turquoise, a sapphire, and a diamond; 12and the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 13and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper; they were mounted in settings of gold filigree. 14The stones corresponded to the names of the sons of Israel; they were twelve [in all], corresponding to their names, engraved like a signet, each with its name, for the twelve tribes. 15And they made on the breastpiece twisted chains like cords of pure gold. 16They made two settings of gold filigree and two gold rings, and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastpiece. 17Then they put the two twisted cords of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastpiece. 18They put the [other] two ends of the two cords on the two filigree settings, and put them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod at the front of it. 19They made two rings of gold and put them on the two ends of the breastpiece, on its inner edge which was next to the ephod. 20Furthermore, they made two [other] gold rings and attached them to the bottom of the two shoulder pieces of the ephod, at the front of it, close to the place where it is joined, above the woven sash of the ephod. 21They bound the breastpiece by its rings to the rings of the ephod with a blue cord, so that it would lie on the woven sash of the ephod, and so that the breastpiece would not come loose from the ephod, just as the LORD commanded Moses.

22Then Bezalel made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue; 23there was an opening [for the head] in the middle of the robe, like the opening in a coat of armor, with a hem around it, so that it would not be frayed or torn. 24On the hem of the robe they made pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, and fine twisted linen. 25They also made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates around the hem of the robe; 26a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, all [the way] around the hem of the robe, for service and ministering, just as the LORD commanded Moses.

27And they made tunics of finely woven linen for Aaron and his sons, 28and the turban of fine linen, and the ornamental caps of fine linen, and the linen undergarments of fine twisted linen, 29and the sash of fine twisted linen, and blue, purple, and scarlet fabric, the work of an embroiderer, just as the LORD commanded Moses.

30They made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote on it an inscription, like the engravings of a signet, “Holy to the LORD.” 31They tied a blue cord to it, to fasten it on the turban above, just as the LORD commanded Moses.

32Thus all the work of the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting was finished; and the Israelites did according to all that the LORD had commanded Moses; that is what they did. 33They brought the tabernacle to Moses [for him to inspect]: the tent and all its furnishings, its hooks, its [frame] boards, its bars, its support poles, its sockets or bases; 34and the covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and the covering of porpoise skins, and the veil (partition) of the screen (curtain); 35the ark of the Testimony, its carrying poles and the mercy seat; 36the table and all its utensils and the bread of the Presence (showbread); 37the pure gold lampstand and its lamps, with the lamps placed in order, all its utensils, and the oil for the light; 38the golden altar [of incense], the anointing oil and the fragrant incense, and the [hanging] veil for the doorway of the tent; 39the bronze altar [of burnt offering] and its grating of bronze, its poles and all its utensils, the basin and its base; 40the curtains of the courtyard, its support poles and sockets, and the screen (curtain) for the courtyard gate, its cords and pegs, and all the utensils for the service of the tabernacle, for the Tent of Meeting [of God with His people]; 41the [finely] woven garments for serving and ministering in the Holy Place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons to minister as priests. 42So the Israelites did all the work according to all that the LORD had commanded Moses. 43And Moses [carefully] inspected all the work, and behold, they had done it; just as the LORD had commanded, so had they done it. So Moses blessed them.

Exodus 40
The Tabernacle Erected

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“On the first day of the first month (Abib) you shall set up the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting [of God with you]. 3You shall place the ark of the Testimony there, and you shall screen off the ark [from the Holy Place of God’s Presence] with the veil (partition curtain). 4You shall bring in the table [for the bread] and arrange its setting; you shall bring in the lampstand and mount and light its lamps. 5You shall set the golden altar of incense in front of the ark of the Testimony [outside the veil], and put the [hanging] veil at the doorway of the tabernacle. 6You shall set the [bronze] altar of burnt offering in front of the doorway of the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting. 7You shall set the basin between the Tent of Meeting and the altar [of burnt offering], and put water in it. 8You shall set up the courtyard [curtains] all around and hang up the screen (curtain) for the gateway of the courtyard. 9Then you shall take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and consecrate it and all its furniture; and it shall be holy (declared sacred, separated from secular use). 10You shall anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and consecrate the altar, and the altar shall be most holy. 11You shall anoint the basin and its base, and consecrate it. 12Then you shall bring Aaron and his sons to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting and wash them with water. 13You shall put the holy garments on Aaron and anoint him and consecrate him, that he may serve as a priest to Me. 14You shall bring his sons and put tunics on them; 15you shall anoint them just as you anointed their father, so that they may serve as priests to Me; and their anointing shall qualify them for an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.” 16Thus Moses did; in accordance with all that the LORD commanded him, so he did.

17Now it happened on the first day of the first month (Abib) in the second year [after the exodus from Egypt], that the tabernacle was erected. 18Moses erected the tabernacle, laid its sockets, set up its boards, put in its bars and erected its support poles. 19He spread the tent over the tabernacle and put the covering of the tent over it, just as the LORD had commanded him. 20He took the Testimony [the stones inscribed with the Ten Commandments] and put it into the ark [of the covenant], and placed the poles [through the rings] on the ark, and put the mercy seat on top of the ark. 21Moses brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up a veil (partition) for the screen (curtain), and screened off the ark of the Testimony, just as the LORD had commanded him. 22Then he put the table in the Tent of Meeting on the north side of the tabernacle, outside the veil. 23He set the bread [of the Presence] in order on it before the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded him. 24Then he put the lampstand in the Tent of Meeting, opposite the table, on the south side of the tabernacle. 25Moses mounted and lighted the lamps [on the lampstand] before the LORD, just as the LORD commanded him. 26He put the golden altar [of incense] in the Tent of Meeting in front of the veil; 27he burned fragrant incense [as a symbol of prayer] on it, just as the LORD commanded him. 28Then he set up the screen (curtain) at the doorway of the tabernacle. 29He set the altar of burnt offering before the doorway of the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting, and offered on it the burnt offering and the grain offering, just as the LORD commanded him. 30He placed the basin between the Tent of Meeting and the altar [of burnt offering], and put water in it for washing. 31Then from it Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet. 32When they entered the Tent of Meeting, and when they approached the altar, they washed, just as the LORD commanded Moses. 33And he erected the courtyard all around the tabernacle and the altar, and hung the screen (curtain) at the gateway of the courtyard. So Moses finished the work.

The Glory of the LORD 34Then the cloud [the Shekinah, God’s visible, dwelling presence] covered the Tent of Meeting, and the glory and brilliance of the LORD filled the tabernacle. 35Moses was not able to enter the Tent of Meeting because the cloud remained on it, and the glory and brilliance of the LORD filled the tabernacle. 36In all their journeys, whenever the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the Israelites would set out; 37but if the cloud was not taken up, then they did not journey on until the day when it was taken up. 38For throughout all their journeys, the cloud of the LORD was on the tabernacle by day, and there was fire in it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel.

Leviticus 1
The Law Of Burnt Offerings

1The LORD called to Moses and spoke to him from the Tent of Meeting, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘When any one of you brings an offering to the LORD, you shall bring your offering of [domestic] animals from the herd (cattle, oxen) or from the flock (sheep, goats). 3‘If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he shall offer a male without blemish; he shall offer it at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting so that he may be accepted before the LORD. 4‘He shall lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering [transferring symbolically his guilt to the sacrifice], that it may be accepted for him to make atonement on his behalf. 5‘He shall kill the young bull before the LORD; and Aaron’s sons the priests shall present the blood and sprinkle the blood around on the altar that is at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 6‘Then he shall skin the burnt offering and cut it into pieces. 7‘The sons of Aaron the [high] priest shall put fire on the altar [of burnt offering] and arrange wood on the fire. 8‘Then Aaron’s sons the priests shall arrange the pieces, the head and the fat, on the wood which is on the fire that is on the altar. 9‘But he shall wash its entrails and its legs with water. The priest shall offer all of it up in smoke on the altar as a burnt offering. It is an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD.

10‘But if his offering is from the flock, of the sheep or of the goats, as a burnt offering, he shall offer a male without blemish. 11‘He shall kill it on the north side of the altar before the LORD, and Aaron’s sons the priests shall sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 12‘He shall cut it into pieces, with its head and its fat, and the priest shall arrange them on the wood which is on the fire that is on the altar. 13‘But he shall wash the entrails and legs with water. The priest shall offer all of it, and offer it up in smoke on the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD.

14‘But if his offering to the LORD is a burnt offering of birds, then he shall bring turtledoves or young pigeons as his offering. 15‘The priest shall bring it to the altar, and wring off its head, and offer it up in smoke on the altar; and its blood is to be drained out on the side of the altar. 16‘He shall remove its crop with its feathers and throw it next to the east side of the altar, in the place for ashes. 17‘Then he shall tear it open by its wings, but shall not sever it. And the priest shall offer it up in smoke on the altar, on the wood that is on the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD.

Leviticus 2
The Law Of Grain Offerings

1‘When anyone presents a grain offering to the Lord, his offering shall be of fine flour, and he shall pour [olive] oil over it and put frankincense on it. 2‘He shall bring it to Aaron’s sons the priests. Out of it he shall take a handful of the fine flour and oil, with all of its frankincense, and the priest shall offer this up in smoke on the altar [of burnt offering] as the memorial portion of it. It is an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 3‘What is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons; it is a most holy part of the offerings to the LORD by fire.

4‘When you bring an offering of grain baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mixed with oil, or unleavened wafers spread with oil. 5‘If your offering is grain baked on a griddle, it shall be of fine unleavened flour, mixed with oil. 6‘You are to break it into pieces, and you shall pour oil on it; it is a grain offering. 7‘Now if your offering is grain cooked in a lidded pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil. 8‘When you bring the grain offering that is made of these things to the LORD, it shall be presented to the priest, and he shall bring it to the altar [of burnt offering]. 9‘The priest shall take from the grain offering its memorial portion and offer it up in smoke on the altar. It is an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 10‘What is left of the grain offering belongs to Aaron and his sons; it is a most holy part of the offerings to the LORD by fire.

11‘No grain offering that you bring to the LORD shall be made with leaven, for you shall not offer up in smoke any leaven [which symbolizes the spread of sin] or any honey [which, like leaven, is subject to fermentation] in any offering by fire to the LORD. 12‘As an offering of first fruits you may offer them [leaven and honey] to the LORD, but they shall not go up [in smoke] on the altar as a sweet and soothing aroma. 13‘You shall season every grain offering with salt so that the salt (preservation) of the covenant of your God will not be missing from your grain offering. You shall offer salt with all your offerings.

14‘If you bring a grain offering of early ripened things to the LORD, you shall bring fresh heads of grain roasted in the fire, crushed grain of new growth, for the grain offering of your early ripened things. 15‘You shall put oil on it and lay incense on it; it is a grain offering. 16‘The priest shall offer up in smoke its memorial portion, part of the crushed grain and part of its oil with all its incense; it is an offering by fire to the LORD.

Leviticus 3
The Law Of Peace Offerings

1‘If a man’s offering is a sacrifice of peace offerings, if he offers an animal from the herd, whether male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the LORD. 2‘He shall lay his hand on the head of his offering [transferring symbolically his guilt to the sacrifice] and kill it at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting; and Aaron’s sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood around on the altar. 3‘From the sacrifice of the peace offerings, an offering by fire to the LORD, he shall present the fat that covers the entrails, and all the fat which is on the entrails, 4and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the lobe of the liver which he shall remove with the kidneys. 5‘Aaron’s sons shall offer it up in smoke on the altar [placing it] on the burnt offering which is on the wood that is on the fire. It is an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 6‘If his peace offering to the LORD is an animal from the flock, male or female, he shall offer the animal without blemish. 7‘If he offers a lamb as his offering, then he shall present it before the LORD, 8and he shall lay his hand on the head of his offering and kill it before the Tent of Meeting, and Aaron’s sons shall sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 9‘From the sacrifice of peace offerings he shall bring as an offering by fire to the LORD, its fat, the entire fat tail which he shall remove close to the backbone, and the fat that covers the entrails, and all the fat which is on the entrails, 10and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which he shall remove with the kidneys. 11‘The priest shall offer it up in smoke on the altar as food, an offering by fire to the LORD.

12‘If his offering is a goat, he shall present it before the LORD, 13and he shall lay his hand on its head [transferring symbolically his guilt to the sacrifice], and kill it before the Tent of Meeting; and the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 14‘Then he shall present from it as his offering, an offering by fire to the LORD: the fat that covers the entrails, and all the fat that is on the entrails, 15and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the lobe of the liver which he shall remove with the kidneys. 16‘The priest shall offer them up in smoke on the altar as food. It is an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma; all the fat is the LORD’S. 17‘It is a permanent statute for your generations wherever you may be, that you shall not eat any fat or any blood.’”

Leviticus 4
The Law Of Sin Offerings

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel, ‘If a person sins unintentionally in any of the things which the LORD has commanded not to be done, and commits any of them— 3if the anointed priest sins, bringing guilt on the people, then he shall offer to the LORD a young bull without blemish as a sin offering for the sin he has committed. 4‘He shall bring the bull to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting before the LORD, and shall lay his hand on the bull’s head [transferring symbolically his guilt to the sacrifice] and kill the bull before the LORD. 5‘Then the anointed priest is to take some of the bull’s blood and bring it into the Tent of Meeting; 6and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle some of it seven times before the LORD in front of the veil (curtain) of the sanctuary. 7‘The priest shall also put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of fragrant incense which is before the LORD in the Tent of Meeting. All the rest of the blood of the bull he shall pour out at the base of the altar of the burnt offering which is at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 8‘He shall remove all the fat from the bull of the sin offering—the fat that covers the entrails, and all the fat which is on the entrails, 9and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which he shall remove with the kidneys 10(just as these are removed from the ox of the sacrifice of peace offerings), and the priest is to offer them up in smoke on the altar of burnt offering. 11‘But the hide of the bull and all its meat, with its head, its legs, its entrails, and its refuse, 12that is, all the rest of the bull, he is to bring outside the camp to a clean place where the ashes are poured out, and burn it on a fire of wood. Where the ashes are poured out it shall be burned.

13‘Now if the whole congregation of Israel sins unintentionally, and the matter escapes the notice of the assembly, and they have done any one of the things which the LORD has commanded not to be done, and they become guilty; 14when the sin which they have committed becomes known, then the congregation shall offer a young bull of the herd as a sin offering and bring it before the Tent of Meeting. 15‘Then the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands on the head of the bull before the LORD [to transfer symbolically the congregation’s guilt to the sacrifice], and they shall kill the bull before the LORD. 16‘The anointed priest is to bring some of the bull’s blood to the Tent of Meeting, 17and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD, in front of the veil [which screens off the Holy of Holies and the ark of the covenant]. 18‘He shall put some of the blood on the horns of the altar [of incense] which is before the LORD in the Tent of Meeting; and he shall pour out all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering which is at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 19‘He shall remove all its fat from the bull and offer it up in smoke on the altar. 20‘He shall also do with the bull just as he did with the bull of the sin offering; that is what he shall do with this. So the priest shall make atonement for [the sin of] the people, and they will be forgiven. 21‘Then the priest is to bring the bull outside the camp and burn it as he burned the first bull; it is the sin offering for the congregation.

22‘When a ruler or leader sins and unintentionally does any one of the things the LORD his God has commanded not to be done, and he becomes guilty, 23if his sin which he has committed is made known to him, he shall bring a goat, a male without blemish as his offering. 24‘He shall lay his hand on the head of the male goat [transferring symbolically his guilt to the sacrifice], and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before the LORD; it is a sin offering. 25‘Then the priest is to take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering; and the rest of its blood he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering. 26‘And he shall offer all its fat up in smoke on the altar like the fat from the sacrifice of peace offerings; so the priest shall make atonement for him in regard to his sin, and he will be forgiven.

27‘If anyone of the common people sins unintentionally by doing any of the things the LORD has commanded not to be done, and becomes guilty, 28if his sin which he has committed is made known to him, then he shall bring a goat, a female without blemish as his offering for the sin which he has committed. 29‘He shall lay his hand on the head of the sin offering [transferring symbolically his guilt to the sacrifice], and kill it at the place of the burnt offering. 30‘The priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering and shall pour out all the rest of its blood at the base of the altar. 31‘Then he shall remove all its fat, just as the fat was removed from the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall offer it up in smoke on the altar as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. In this way the priest shall make atonement for him, and he will be forgiven.

32‘If he brings a lamb as his offering for a sin offering, he shall bring a female without blemish. 33‘He shall lay his hand on the head of the sin offering [transferring symbolically his guilt to the sacrifice], and kill it as a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering. 34‘The priest is to take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering and all the rest of the blood of the lamb he shall pour out at the base of the altar. 35‘Then he shall remove all its fat, just as the fat of the lamb is removed from the sacrifice of the peace offerings, and the priest shall offer it up in smoke on the altar, on the offerings by fire to the LORD. In this way the priest shall make atonement for him in regard to the sin which he has committed, and he will be forgiven.

Leviticus 5
The Law Of Guilt Offerings

1‘If anyone sins after he hears a public adjuration (solemn command to testify) when he is a witness, whether he has seen or [otherwise] known [something]—if he fails to report it, then he will bear his guilt and be held responsible. 2‘Or if someone touches any [ceremonially] unclean thing—whether the carcass of an unclean wild animal or the carcass of an unclean domestic animal or the carcass of unclean creeping things—even if he is unaware of it, he has become unclean, and he will be guilty. 3‘Or if he touches human uncleanness—whatever kind it may be—and he becomes unclean, but he is unaware of it, when he recognizes it, he will be guilty. 4‘Or if anyone swears [an oath] thoughtlessly or impulsively aloud that he will do either evil or good, in whatever manner a person may speak thoughtlessly or impulsively with an oath, but he is unaware of it, when he recognizes it, he will be guilty in one of these. 5‘So it shall be when a person is guilty in one of these, that he shall confess the sin he has committed. 6‘He shall bring his guilt offering to the LORD for the sin which he has committed, a female from the flock, a lamb or a goat as a sin offering. So the priest shall make atonement on his behalf for his sin.

7‘But if he cannot afford a lamb, then he shall bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons as his guilt offering for his sin to the LORD, one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering. 8‘He shall bring them to the priest, who shall offer first the one for the sin offering, and shall nip its head at the front of its neck, but shall not sever it [completely]. 9‘He shall also sprinkle some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the altar, and the rest of the blood shall be drained out at the base of the altar; it is a sin offering. 10‘The second [bird] he shall prepare as a burnt offering, according to the ordinance. So the priest shall make atonement on his behalf for the sin which he has committed, and it will be forgiven him.

11‘But if he cannot afford to bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons, then he shall bring as his offering for his sin the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour as a sin offering; he shall not put [olive] oil or incense on it, for it is a sin offering. 12‘He shall bring it to the priest, who shall take a handful of it as a memorial portion and offer it up in smoke on the altar, with the offerings by fire to the LORD; it is a sin offering. 13‘In this way the priest shall make atonement for him for the sin which he has committed in one of these things, and it will be forgiven him; then the rest shall be for the priest, like the grain offering.’”

14Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 15“If a person commits a breach of faith and sins unintentionally against the holy things of the LORD, then he shall bring his guilt offering to the LORD, a ram without blemish from the flock, valued by you in shekels of silver, that is, the shekel of the sanctuary, as a guilt offering. 16He shall make restitution for the sin which he has committed against the holy thing, and shall add a fifth [of the ram’s value] to it, and give it to the priest. The priest shall then make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering, and he shall be forgiven.

17“Now if anyone sins and does any of the things which the LORD has forbidden, though he was not aware of it, still he is guilty and shall bear his punishment. 18He is then to bring to the priest a ram without blemish from the flock, according to your valuation, for a guilt offering. In this way the priest shall make atonement for him regarding the error which he committed unintentionally and did not know it, and he shall be forgiven. 19“It is a guilt offering; he was certainly guilty before the LORD.”

Leviticus 6
Guilt Offerings

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“When anyone sins and acts unfaithfully against the LORD by deceiving his neighbor (companion, associate) in regard to a deposit or a security entrusted to him, or through robbery, or if he has extorted from his neighbor, 3or has found what was lost and lied about it and sworn falsely, so that he sins in regard to any one of the things a man may do— 4then if he has sinned and is guilty, he shall restore what he took by robbery, or what he got by extortion, or the deposit which was entrusted to him, or the lost thing which he found, 5or anything about which he has sworn falsely; he shall not only restore it in full, but shall add to it one-fifth more. He shall give it to the one to whom it belongs on the day of his guilt offering. 6Then he shall bring to the priest his guilt offering to the LORD, a ram without blemish from the flock, as valued by you, as a guilt offering. 7“The priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD, and he will be forgiven for any one of the things which he may have done to incur guilt.”

The Priest’s Part in the Offerings 8Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 9“Command Aaron and his sons, saying, ‘This is the law of the burnt offering: the burnt offering shall remain on the hearth that is on the altar all night until morning and the fire is to be kept burning on the altar. 10‘The priest is to put on his linen robe, with his linen undergarments next to his body. Then he shall take up the ashes of the burnt offering which the fire has consumed on the altar and put them beside the altar. 11‘Then he shall take off his garments and put on something else, and take the ashes outside the camp to a (ceremonially) clean place. 12‘The fire on the altar shall be kept burning; it shall not [be allowed to] go out. The priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and he shall arrange the burnt offering on it and offer the fat portions of the peace offerings up in smoke on it. 13‘The fire shall be burning continually on the altar; it shall not [be allowed to] go out.

14‘Now this is the law of the grain offering: the sons of Aaron shall present it before the LORD in front of the altar. 15‘One of them shall take up from it a handful of the fine flour of the grain offering with its oil and all the incense that is on the grain offering, and he shall offer it up in smoke on the altar, a sweet and soothing aroma, as the memorial offering to the LORD. 16‘What is left of it Aaron and his sons are to eat. It shall be eaten as unleavened bread in a holy place; they are to eat it in the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting. 17‘It shall not be baked with leaven [which represents corruption or sin]. I have given it as their share of My offerings by fire; it is most holy, like the sin offering and the guilt offering. 18‘Every male among the sons of Aaron may eat it [as his share]; it is a permanent ordinance throughout your generations, from offerings by fire to the LORD. Whatever touches them will become consecrated (ceremonially clean).’”

19Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 20“This is the offering which Aaron and his sons are to present to the LORD on the day when he is anointed: the tenth of an ephah of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening. 21It shall be prepared with oil on a griddle. When it is well stirred, you shall bring it. You shall present the grain offering in baked pieces as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 22The priest from among the sons of Aaron who is anointed in his place shall offer it. By a permanent statute it shall be entirely offered up in smoke to the LORD. 23“So every grain offering of the priest shall be burned entirely. It shall not be eaten.”

24Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 25“Speak to Aaron and his sons, saying, ‘This is the law of the sin offering: the sin offering shall be killed before the LORD in the [same] place where the burnt offering is killed; it is most holy. 26‘The priest who offers it for sin shall eat it. It shall be eaten in a holy place, in the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting. 27‘Whatever touches its meat will become consecrated (ceremonially clean). When any of its blood splashes on a garment, you shall wash what was splashed on in a holy place. 28‘Also the earthenware vessel in which it was boiled shall be broken; and if it was boiled in a bronze vessel, then that vessel shall be scoured and rinsed in water. 29‘Every male among the priests may eat this offering; it is most holy. 30‘But no sin offering from which any of the blood is brought into the Tent of Meeting to make atonement in the Holy Place shall be eaten; it shall be [completely] burned in the fire.

Leviticus 7
The Priest’s Part In The Offerings

1‘This is the law of the guilt offering; it is most holy. 2‘In the place where they kill the burnt offering they are to kill the guilt offering, and he shall sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 3‘Then he shall offer all its fat, the fat tail and the fat that covers the entrails, 4and the two kidneys with the fat that is on them at the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which he shall remove with the kidneys. 5‘The priest shall offer them up in smoke on the altar as an offering by fire to the LORD; it is a guilt offering. 6‘Every male among the priests may eat it; it shall be eaten in a holy place; it is most holy. 7‘The guilt offering is like the sin offering, there is one law for [both of] them: the priest who makes atonement with it shall have it for himself. 8‘The priest who presents any man’s burnt offering shall have for himself the hide of the burnt offering which he has presented. 9‘Likewise, every grain offering that is baked in the oven and everything that is prepared in a pan or on a griddle shall belong to the priest who presents it. 10‘Every grain offering, mixed with [olive] oil or dry, all the sons of Aaron may have, one as well as another.

11‘Now this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings which shall be presented to the LORD: 12‘If one offers it as a sacrificial meal of thanksgiving, then along with the sacrifice of thanksgiving he shall offer unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes of fine flour mixed with oil. 13‘With the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving, he shall present his offering with cakes of leavened bread. 14‘Of this he shall present one [cake] from each offering as a contribution to the LORD; it shall belong to the priest who sprinkles the blood of the peace offerings.

15‘The meat of the sacrifice of thanksgiving presented as a peace offering shall be eaten on the day that it is offered; none of it shall be left until morning. 16‘But if the sacrifice of his offering is a vow or a freewill offering, it shall be eaten on the day that he offers his sacrifice, and on the next day that which remains of it may be eaten; 17but what is left over from the meat of the sacrifice on the third day shall be [completely] burned in the fire. 18‘If any of the meat of the sacrifice of his peace offerings is ever eaten on the third day, then it will not be accepted, and the one who brought it will not be credited with it. It shall be an abhorred (offensive) thing; the one who eats it shall bear his own guilt.

19‘The meat that comes in contact with anything that is unclean shall not be eaten; it shall be burned in the fire. As for other meat, everyone who is [ceremonially] clean may eat it. 20‘But the one who eats meat from the sacrifice of peace offerings which belong to the LORD, in his uncleanness, that person shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 21‘When anyone touches any unclean thing—human uncleanness, or an unclean animal, or any unclean detestable thing—and then eats the meat of the sacrifice of the LORD’S peace offerings, that person shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them].’”

22Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 23“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘You shall not eat any fat from an ox, a sheep, or a goat. 24‘The fat of an animal which dies [of natural causes] and the fat of one which is torn [to pieces by a predator] may be put to any other use, but under no circumstances are you to eat it. 25‘For whoever eats the fat of the animal from which an offering by fire is presented to the LORD, that person who eats shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 26‘Moreover, you are not to eat any blood [of any kind], whether of bird or animal, in any of your dwelling places. 27‘Whoever eats any blood, that person shall be cut off from his people.’”

28Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 29“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘He who offers the sacrifice of his peace offerings to the LORD shall bring his offering to the LORD from the sacrifice of his peace offerings. 30‘With his own hands he is to bring offerings by fire to the LORD; he shall bring the fat with the breast, so that the breast may be presented as a wave offering before the LORD. 31‘The priest shall offer up the fat in smoke on the altar, but the breast shall be for Aaron and his sons. 32‘You shall give the right thigh to the priest as a contribution from the sacrifices of your peace offerings. 33‘The son of Aaron who offers the blood of the peace offerings and the fat shall have the right thigh as his portion. 34‘For I have taken the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the heave offering from the Israelites, from the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and I have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons as their perpetual portion from the Israelites.

35‘This is the consecrated portion from the offerings by fire to the LORD that was designated for Aaron and his sons on the day he presented them to serve as priests to the LORD. 36‘The LORD commanded this to be given to the priests by the Israelites on the day that He anointed them. It is their portion perpetually throughout their generations.’”

37This is the law of the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin offering, the guilt offering, the consecration (ordination) offering, and the sacrifice of peace offerings, 38which the LORD commanded Moses at Mount Sinai on the day He commanded the Israelites to present their offerings to the LORD, in the Wilderness of Sinai.

Leviticus 8
The Consecration Of Aaron And His Sons

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments [which are symbols of their office], and the anointing oil, and the bull for the sin offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread; 3and assemble the entire congregation at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting.” 4Moses did as the LORD commanded him, and the congregation was assembled at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 5Moses said to the congregation, “This is what the LORD has commanded us to do.”

6Then Moses brought Aaron and his sons and washed them with water. 7He put the undertunic on Aaron, tied the sash around him, clothed him in the robe, and put the ephod (an upper vestment) on him. He tied the [skillfully woven] band of the ephod around him, with which he secured it to Aaron. 8Moses then put the breastpiece on Aaron, and he put in the breastpiece the Urim and the Thummim [the sacred articles the high priest used when seeking God’s will concerning the nation]. 9He also put the turban on Aaron’s head, and on it, in the front, Moses placed the golden plate, the holy crown, just as the LORD had commanded him.

10Then Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it, and consecrated them. 11He sprinkled some of the oil on the altar seven times and anointed the altar and all its utensils, and the basin and its stand, to consecrate them. 12Then he poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron’s head and anointed him, to consecrate him. 13Next Moses brought Aaron’s sons forward, put undertunics on them, belted them with sashes, and bound caps on them, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

14Then he brought the bull for the sin offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the bull. 15Next Moses killed it and took the blood and with his finger put some of it around on the horns of the altar and purified it [from sin]. Then he poured out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar and consecrated it, to make atonement for it. 16He took all the fat that was on the entrails, and the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys with their fat, and Moses offered them up in smoke on the altar. 17But the bull (the sin offering) and its hide, its meat, and its refuse he burned in the fire outside the camp, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

18He brought the ram for the burnt offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. 19Moses killed it and sprinkled the blood around on the altar. 20When he had cut the ram into pieces, Moses offered up the head, the pieces, and the fat in smoke. 21After he had washed the entrails and the legs in water, Moses offered up the whole ram in smoke on the altar. It was a burnt offering for a sweet and soothing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

22Then he brought the second ram, the ram of consecration (ordination), and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. 23Moses killed it and took some of its blood and put it on the lobe of Aaron’s right ear, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot. 24He also brought Aaron’s sons forward and put some of the blood on the lobes of their right ears, and the thumbs of their right hands, and the big toes of their right feet; and Moses sprinkled the rest of the blood around on the altar. 25He took the fat, the fat tail, all the fat that was on the entrails, the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys and their fat, and the right thigh; 26and from the basket of unleavened bread that was before the LORD, he took one unleavened cake, a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer and put them on the fat and on the right thigh; 27and he put all these things in Aaron’s hands and his sons’ hands and presented them as a wave offering before the LORD. 28Then Moses took these things from their hands and offered them up in smoke on the altar with the burnt offering. They were a consecration (ordination) offering for a sweet and soothing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD. 29Moses also took the breast and presented it as a wave offering before the LORD; it was Moses’ portion of the ram of consecration (ordination), just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

30So Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood which was on the altar and sprinkled it on Aaron and his garments, and also on his sons and their garments with him; so Moses consecrated Aaron and his garments, and his sons and his sons’ garments with him.

31Then Moses said to Aaron and to his sons, “Boil the meat at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting and eat it there together with the bread that is in the basket of the consecration (ordination) offering, just as I commanded, saying, ‘Aaron and his sons shall eat it.’ 32And what remains of the meat and of the bread you shall burn in the fire. 33You shall not go outside the doorway of the Tent of Meeting for seven days, until the days of your consecration (ordination) are ended; for it will take seven days to consecrate you. 34As has been done this day, so the LORD has commanded to do for your atonement. 35“You shall remain day and night for seven days at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting, doing what the Lord has required you to do, so that you will not die; for so I (Moses) have been commanded.” 36So Aaron and his sons did all the things which the LORD had commanded through Moses.

Leviticus 9
Aaron Offers Sacrifices

1And it happened on the eighth day that Moses called Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel; 2and he said to Aaron, “Take a bull calf as a sin offering and a ram as a burnt offering, [each] without blemish, and offer both before the LORD. 3Then say to the Israelites, ‘Take a male goat as a sin offering, and a calf and a lamb, both one year old, without blemish, as a burnt offering, 4and a bull and a ram as peace offerings to sacrifice before the LORD, and a grain offering mixed with [olive] oil, for today the LORD will appear to you.’” 5So they took what Moses had commanded to the front of the Tent of Meeting, and all the congregation approached and stood before the LORD. 6Moses said, “This is the thing which the LORD has commanded you to do, so that the glory of the LORD may appear to you.” 7Moses said to Aaron, “Approach the altar and present your sin offering and your burnt offering and make atonement for yourself and for the people; and present the offering of the people and make atonement for them, just as the LORD has commanded.”

8So Aaron approached the altar and killed the calf as the sin offering, which was designated for himself. 9The sons of Aaron presented the blood to him; he dipped his finger in the blood and put some of it on the horns of the altar, and poured out the rest of the blood at the altar’s base; 10but the fat, the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver from the sin offering he offered up in smoke on the altar, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. 11And Aaron burned the meat and the hide in the fire outside the camp.

12Then he killed the burnt offering; and Aaron’s sons handed the blood to him and he sprinkled it around on the altar. 13They brought the burnt offering to him piece by piece, with the head, and Aaron offered them up in smoke on the altar. 14He also washed the entrails and the legs, and offered them up in smoke with the burnt offering on the altar.

15Then Aaron presented the people’s offering. He took the goat for the sin offering of the people, and killed it and offered it for sin, as he did the first. 16He also presented the burnt offering and offered it according to the ordinance. 17Next Aaron presented the grain offering and took a handful of it and offered it up in smoke on the altar in addition to the burnt offering of the morning.

18He also killed the bull and the ram, the sacrifice of peace offerings which was for the people; and Aaron’s sons handed the blood to him and he sprinkled it around on the altar, 19As for the portions of fat from the bull and from the ram—the fat tail, and the fat covering the internal organs, and the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver— 20they now put the portions of fat on the breasts; and Aaron offered the fat up in smoke on the altar. 21But the breasts and the right thigh Aaron presented as a wave offering before the LORD, just as Moses had commanded.

22Then Aaron lifted his hands toward the people and blessed them, and came down [from the altar of burnt offering] after presenting the sin offering, the burnt offering, and the peace offerings. 23Moses and Aaron went into the Tent of Meeting, and when they came out they blessed the people, and the glory and brilliance of the LORD [the Shekinah cloud] appeared to all the people [as promised]. 24Then fire came out from before the LORD and consumed the burnt offering and the portions of fat on the altar; and when all the people saw it, they shouted and fell face downward [in awe and worship].

Leviticus 10
The Sin Of Nadab And Abihu

1Now Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took their respective [ceremonial] censers, put fire in them, placed incense on it and offered strange (unauthorized, unacceptable) fire before the LORD, [an act] which He had not commanded them to do. 2And fire came out from the presence of the LORD and devoured them, and they died before the LORD. 3Then Moses said to Aaron, “This is what the LORD said:
‘I will be treated as holy by those who approach Me,
And before all the people I will be honored.’”
So Aaron, therefore, said nothing.

4Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel who was Aaron’s uncle, and said to them, “Come here, carry your relatives away from the front of the sanctuary and take them outside the camp.” 5So they came forward and carried them, still in their undertunics, outside the camp, as Moses had said. 6Then Moses said to Aaron and to his [younger] sons Eleazar and Ithamar, “Do not uncover your heads nor let your hair hang loose nor tear your clothes [as expressions of mourning], so that you will not die [also] and so that He will not express His wrath and anger toward all the congregation. But your relatives, the whole house of Israel, may mourn the burning which the LORD has brought about. 7“You shall not even go out of the doorway of the Tent of Meeting, or you will die; for the LORD’S anointing oil is upon you.” So they did [everything] according to the word of Moses.

8Then the LORD spoke to Aaron, saying, 9“Do not drink wine or intoxicating drink, neither you nor your sons with you, when you come into the Tent of Meeting, so that you will not die—it is a permanent statute throughout your generations— 10and to make a distinction and recognize a difference between the holy (sacred) and the common (profane), and between the [ceremonially] unclean and the clean; 11and you are to teach the Israelites all the statutes which the LORD has spoken to them through Moses.”

12Then Moses said to Aaron, and to his surviving sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, “Take the grain offering that is left over from the offerings by fire to the LORD, and eat it unleavened beside the altar, for it is most holy. 13You shall eat it in a holy place, because it is your portion and your sons’ portion, from the offerings by fire to the LORD; for so I have been commanded. 14But the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the heave offering you may eat in a clean place, you and your sons and daughters with you; for the breast and the thigh are your portion and your sons’ portion, given out of the sacrifices of the peace offerings of the Israelites. 15“They shall bring the thigh presented by lifting up and the breast presented by waving, along with the offerings by fire of the fat, to present as a wave offering before the LORD. This shall be yours and your sons’ with you, as your perpetual portion, just as the LORD has commanded.”

16But Moses diligently tried to find the goat [that had been offered] as the sin offering, and discovered that it had been burned up [as waste, not eaten]! So he was angry with Aaron’s surviving sons Eleazar and Ithamar, saying, 17“Why did you not eat the sin offering in the holy place? For it is most holy; and God gave it to you to remove the guilt of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the LORD. 18“Behold, its blood was not brought into the Holy Place; you certainly should have eaten the goat in the sanctuary, just as I commanded.” 19Then Aaron said to Moses, “This very day they have [obediently] presented their sin offering and their burnt offering before the LORD, but [such terrible things] as these have happened to me [and to them]; if I [and my sons] had eaten a sin offering today would it have been acceptable and pleasing in the sight of the LORD?” 20When Moses heard that, he was satisfied.

Leviticus 11
Laws About Animals For Food

1The LORD spoke again to Moses and Aaron, saying to them, 2“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘Among all the animals which are on the earth, these are the animals which you may eat. 3‘You may eat any animal that has a divided hoof [that is, a hoof split into two parts especially at its distal extremity] and chews the cud. 4‘Nevertheless, you are not to eat these, among those which chew the cud or divide the hoof: the camel, because it chews the cud but does not divide the hoof; it is [ceremonially] unclean to you. 5‘And the shaphan, because it chews the cud but does not divide the hoof; it is unclean to you. 6‘And the hare, because it chews the cud but does not divide the hoof; it is unclean to you. 7‘And the swine, because it divides the hoof and makes a split hoof, but does not chew the cud; it is unclean to you. 8‘You shall not eat their meat nor touch their carcasses; they are unclean to you.

9‘These you may eat, whatever is in the water: whatever has fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, these you may eat; 10but whatever does not have fins and scales in the seas and in the rivers, of all the teeming life in the waters, and of all the living creatures that are in the waters, they are [to be considered] detestable to you. 11‘They shall be hated things to you. You may not eat their meat; you shall detest their carcasses. 12‘Everything in the water that does not have fins and scales is detestable to you.

Avoid the Unclean 13‘These you shall detest among the birds; they are not to be eaten, for they are hated things: the eagle and the vulture and the buzzard, 14the kite, every kind of falcon, 15every kind of raven, 16the ostrich, the nighthawk, the sea gull, every species of hawk, 17the little owl and the cormorant and the great owl, 18the white owl, the pelican, the carrion vulture, 19the stork, all kinds of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.

20‘All winged insects that walk on all fours are detestable to you; 21yet of all winged insects that walk on all fours you may eat those which have legs above their feet with which to leap on the ground. 22‘Of these you may eat: the whole species of migratory locust, of bald locust, of cricket, and of grasshopper. 23‘But all other winged insects which are four footed are detestable to you.

24‘By [contact with] these you will become unclean; whoever touches their carcasses becomes unclean until the evening (dusk), 25and whoever picks up any of their carcasses shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening. 26‘Concerning all the animals which divide the hoof, but do not have a split hoof, or which do not chew the cud, they are unclean to you; whoever touches them becomes unclean. 27‘Also all animals that walk on their paws, among all kinds of animals that walk on four legs, are unclean to you; whoever touches their carcasses becomes unclean until the evening, 28and the one who picks up their carcasses shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening; they are unclean to you.

29‘These also are unclean to you among the swarming things that crawl around on the ground [and multiply profusely]: the mole, the mouse, and any kind of great lizard, 30the gecko, the crocodile, the lizard, the sand reptile, and the chameleon. 31‘These [creatures] are unclean to you among all that swarm; whoever touches them when they are dead becomes unclean until evening. 32‘Also anything on which one of them falls after dying becomes unclean, whether it is an article of wood or clothing, or a skin, or a sack—any article that is used—it must be put in water, and will be unclean until the evening; then it becomes clean. 33‘As for any earthenware container into which any of these [crawling things] falls, whatever is in it becomes unclean, and you shall break the container. 34‘Any of the food which may be eaten, but on which [unclean] water falls, shall become unclean, and any liquid that may be drunk in every container shall become unclean. 35‘Everything that part of their carcass falls on becomes unclean; an oven, or a small stove shall be smashed; they are unclean, and shall be unclean to you. 36‘Nevertheless a spring or a cistern (reservoir) collecting water shall be clean; but whoever touches one of these carcasses shall be unclean. 37‘If a part of their carcass falls on any seed for sowing which is to be sown, it is clean; 38but if water is put on the seed and a part of their carcass falls on it, it is unclean to you.

39‘If one of the animals that you may eat dies [of natural causes], whoever touches its carcass becomes unclean until the evening. 40‘And whoever eats some of its meat shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until evening; also whoever picks up its carcass shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening.

41‘Now everything that swarms on the ground is detestable; it is not to be eaten. 42‘Whatever crawls on its belly, and whatever walks on all fours, and whatever has many feet among all things that swarm on the ground, you shall not eat; for they are detestable. 43‘Do not make yourselves loathsome (impure, repulsive) by [eating] any swarming thing; you shall not make yourselves unclean by them so as to defile yourselves. 44‘For I am the LORD your God; so consecrate yourselves and be holy, for I am holy. You shall not make yourselves unclean with any of the swarming things that swarm or crawls on the ground. 45‘For I am the LORD who brought you up from the land of Egypt to be your God; therefore you shall be holy, for I am holy.’”

46This is the law regarding the animal and the bird and every living thing that moves in the waters and everything that swarms on the earth, 47to make a distinction between the [ceremonially] unclean and the [ceremonially] clean, and between the animal that may be eaten and the animal that may not be eaten.

Leviticus 12
Laws Of Motherhood

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel, saying,

‘If a woman conceives and gives birth to a male child, she shall be [ceremonially] unclean for seven days, unclean as during her monthly period. 3‘On the eighth day the flesh of the male child’s foreskin shall be circumcised. 4‘Then she shall remain [intimately separated] thirty-three days to be purified from the blood; she shall not touch any consecrated thing nor enter the [courtyard of the] sanctuary until the days of her purification are over. 5‘But if she gives birth to a female child, then she shall be unclean for two weeks, as during her monthly period, and she shall remain [intimately separated] sixty-six days to be purified from the blood.

6‘When the days of her purification are completed, whether for a son or for a daughter, she shall bring to the priest at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting a one year old lamb as a burnt offering and a young pigeon or a turtledove as a sin offering; 7and he shall offer it before the LORD and make atonement for her, and she shall be cleansed from the flow of her blood. This is the law for her who gives birth to a child, whether a male or a female child. 8‘If she cannot afford a lamb then she shall take two turtledoves or young pigeons, one as a burnt offering, the other as a sin offering; the priest shall make atonement for her, and she will be clean.’”

Leviticus 13
The Test For Leprosy

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 2“When a man has a swelling on the skin of his body, a scab, or a bright spot, and it becomes the infection of leprosy on the skin of his body, then he shall be brought to Aaron the priest, or to one of his sons the priests. 3The priest shall look at the diseased spot on the skin of his body, and if the hair in the infection has turned white and the infection appears deeper than the skin of his body, it is an infection of leprosy; when the priest has looked at him, he shall pronounce him [ceremonially] unclean. 4If the bright spot is white on the skin of his body and does not appear to be deeper than the skin, and the hair on it has not turned white, the priest shall isolate the person who has the infection for seven days. 5The priest shall examine it on the seventh day, and if in his estimation the infection has not changed and has not spread on the skin, then the priest shall isolate him for seven more days. 6The priest shall examine him again on the seventh day, and if the infection has a more normal color and the spot has not spread on the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean; it is only a scab; and he shall wash his clothes and be clean.

7“But if the scab spreads farther on the skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his [ceremonial] cleansing, he shall show himself to the priest again. 8The priest shall look, and if the scab has spread on the skin, then he shall pronounce him unclean; it is leprosy.

9“When a leprous infection is on a person, he shall be brought to the priest. 10The priest shall examine him, and if there is a white swelling on the skin and it has turned the hair white and there is new raw flesh in the swelling, 11it is a chronic leprosy on the skin of his body, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean; he shall not isolate him because he is [clearly] unclean. 12But if the [suspected] leprosy breaks out farther on the skin, and it covers all of the skin of the one who has the outbreak—from his head to his foot—wherever the priest looks, 13the priest shall examine him. If the [suspected] leprosy has covered his entire body, he shall pronounce him clean of the disease; it has all turned white, and he is clean. 14But whenever raw flesh appears on him, he shall be unclean. 15The priest shall examine the raw flesh, and he shall pronounce him unclean; the raw flesh is unclean, it is leprosy. 16But if the raw flesh turns again and is changed to white, then he shall come to the priest, 17and the priest shall examine him, and if the diseased part is changed to white, then the priest shall pronounce him who had the disease to be clean; he is clean.

18“And when there is on the skin of the body [the scar of] a boil that is healed, 19and in the place of the boil there is a white swelling or a bright spot, reddish white, then it shall be shown to the priest; 20and the priest shall look, and if it looks deeper than the skin and the hair on it has turned white, the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is the disease of leprosy; it has broken out in the boil. 21But if the priest examines it and finds no white hair in it and it is not deeper than the skin and is dull in color, then the priest shall isolate him for seven days. 22If it spreads farther on the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a disease. 23But if the bright spot remains where it is and does not spread, it is the scar of the boil, and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

24“Or if the body has on its skin a burn from fire and the new flesh of the burn becomes a bright spot, reddish white or white, 25then the priest shall examine it, and if the hair in the bright spot has turned white, and it appears deeper than the skin, then leprosy has broken out in the burn. So the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is the disease of leprosy. 26But if the priest examines it and there is no white hair in the bright spot and it is not deeper than [the rest of] the skin but is dull in color, then the priest shall isolate him for seven days. 27And the priest shall examine him on the seventh day; if it is spreading farther on the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is leprosy. 28But if the bright spot remains in its place and has not spread in the skin, but is dull in color, it is a swelling from the burn, and the priest shall pronounce him clean; for it is the scar of the burn.

29“When a man or woman has a disease on the head or in the beard (face), 30the priest shall examine the diseased place; if it appears to be deeper than the skin, with yellow, thin hair in it, the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a scale, it is leprosy of the head or beard. 31But if the priest examines the spot infected by the scale, and it does not appear deeper than the skin and there is no black hair in it, the priest shall isolate the person with the scaly infection for seven days. 32On the seventh day the priest shall examine the diseased spot; if the scale has not spread and has no yellow hair in it, and the scale does not look deeper than the skin, 33then he shall shave himself, but he shall not shave the scale; and the priest shall isolate the person with the scale for seven more days. 34Then on the seventh day the priest shall look at the scale; if the scale has not spread on the skin and appears to be no deeper than the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean; he shall wash his clothes and be clean. 35But if the scale spreads farther on the skin after his cleansing, 36then the priest shall examine him, and if the scale has spread on the skin, the priest need not look for the yellowish hair; he is unclean. 37If, in the priest’s estimation, the scale has remained [without spreading], and black hair has grown in it, the scale is healed; he is clean, and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

38“When a man or a woman has bright spots on the skin of the body, even white bright spots, 39then the priest shall look, and if the bright spots on the skin of their bodies is a dull white, it is [only] a rash that has broken out on the skin; he is clean.

40“If a man loses the hair on his head, he is bald, but he is clean. 41And if he loses the hair on front of his head, he is bald on the forehead, but he is clean. 42But if there is a reddish-white infection on the bald head or forehead, it is leprosy breaking out on his bald head or forehead. 43Then the priest shall examine him, and if the diseased swelling is reddish-white on his bald head or forehead like the appearance of leprosy on the skin of the body, 44he is a leprous man; he is unclean; the priest shall most certainly pronounce him unclean; his disease is on his head.

45“As for the leper who has the infection, his clothes shall be torn, and the hair of his head shall be uncovered (disheveled), and he shall cover his mustache and call out, ‘Unclean! Unclean!’ 46He shall remain [ceremonially] unclean as long as the disease is on him; he is unclean. He shall live alone; he shall live outside the camp.

47“When a garment has a mark of leprosy in it, whether it is a wool garment or a linen garment, 48whether in woven or knitted material or in the warp (lengthwise strands) or woof (crosswise strands) of linen or of wool, or in a skin or on anything made of leather, 49if the mark is greenish or reddish in the garment or in the leather or in the warp or woof or in any article made of leather, it is an infestation of leprosy and shall be shown to the priest. 50The priest shall examine the mark and shall quarantine the article with the mark for seven days. 51He shall examine the mark on the seventh day; if it has spread in the garment, whether in the warp or the woof, or in the leather, whatever the leather’s purpose, the mark is a malignant leprosy; it is unclean. 52So he shall burn the garment, whether the warp or woof, in wool or linen, or on anything made of leather in which the mark occurs; for it is a malignant leprosy; it shall be burned in the fire.

53“But if the priest sees that the mark has not spread in the garment, either in the warp or the woof, or on anything made of leather, 54then the priest shall order that they wash the thing in which the mark occurs, and he shall quarantine it for seven more days. 55The priest shall examine the article with the mark after it has been washed, and if the mark has not changed color, even though the mark has not spread, it is unclean; you shall burn it in the fire; it is a corroding mildew, whether on the top or on the front of it.

56“If the priest looks and the mark has faded after it is washed, he shall tear it out of the garment, or the leather, or out of the warp or woof. 57If it still appears in the garment, either in the warp or in the woof, or on anything made of leather, it is an outbreak; you shall burn the marked part in the fire. 58“The garment, whether the warp or the woof, or anything made of leather from which the mildew has departed after washing, shall then be washed a second time and it will be [ceremonially] clean.”

59This is the law for a leprous disease in a garment of wool or linen, either in the warp or woof, or on anything made of leather, to pronounce it clean or unclean.

Leviticus 14
Law Of Cleansing A Leper

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“This shall be the law of the leper on the day of his [ceremonial] cleansing. He shall be brought to the priest [at a meeting place outside the camp]; 3the priest shall go out of the camp [to meet him]; and the priest shall examine him, and if the leper has been healed of the infection of leprosy, 4then the priest shall give orders to take two live clean birds and cedar wood and scarlet string and hyssop for the one to be cleansed. 5Next the priest shall order that one of the birds be killed [as a sacrifice] in an earthenware container over [fresh] running water. 6As for the live bird, he shall take it together with the cedar wood and the scarlet string and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the live bird in the blood of the bird sacrificed over the running water. 7He shall sprinkle [the blood] seven times on the one to be cleansed from the leprosy and shall pronounce him [ceremonially] clean. Then he shall let the live bird go free over the open field. 8The one to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, shave off all his hair, and bathe in water; and he shall be clean. After that he may come into the camp, but he shall stay outside of his tent for seven days. 9On the seventh day he shall shave off all his hair: he shall shave his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair [on his body]. Then he shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and be clean.

10“Now on the eighth day he shall take two male lambs without blemish, and a yearling ewe lamb without blemish, and three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with [olive] oil as a grain offering, and one log (about a pint) of oil; 11and the priest who cleanses him shall present the man to be cleansed and his offerings before the LORD at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 12Then the priest shall take one of the male lambs and offer it as a guilt offering, with the log of oil, and present them as a wave offering before the LORD. 13He shall kill the male lamb in the place where they kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the sacred place [the courtyard of the tabernacle]; for the guilt offering, like the sin offering, belongs to the priest; it is most holy. 14The priest shall take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the lobe of the right ear of the one to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot. 15The priest shall also take some of the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand; 16and the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left palm, and with his finger sprinkle some of the oil seven times before the LORD. 17Of the rest of the oil which is in his palm, the priest shall put some on the lobe of the right ear of the one to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, on top of the blood of the guilt offering. 18The remaining oil that is in the priest’s palm shall be put on the head of the one to be cleansed. The priest shall make atonement for him before the LORD. 19Next the priest shall offer the sin offering and make atonement for the one to be cleansed from his uncleanness, and afterward kill the burnt offering. 20The priest shall offer the burnt offering and the grain offering on the altar; and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be clean.

21“But if the cleansed leper is poor and his means are insufficient, then he is to take one lamb as a guilt offering to be waved to make atonement for him, and one tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, and a log of oil, 22and two turtledoves or two young pigeons, such as he can afford, one shall be a sin offering, the other a burnt offering. 23He shall bring them on the eighth day for his [ceremonial] cleansing to the priest at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting, before the LORD. 24The priest shall take the lamb of the guilt offering, and the log of oil, and shall present them as a wave offering before the LORD. 25Next he shall kill the lamb of the guilt offering; and the priest is to take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the lobe of the right ear of the one to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot. 26The priest shall pour some of the oil into his left palm, 27and with his right finger the priest shall sprinkle some of the oil that is in his left palm seven times before the LORD. 28The priest shall put some of the oil in his palm on the lobe of the right ear of the one to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, on the places where he has put the blood of the guilt offering. 29The rest of the oil that is in the priest’s palm shall be put on the head of the one to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before the LORD. 30Then he shall offer one of the turtledoves or young pigeons, which are within his means. 31He shall offer what he can afford, one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering, together with the grain offering. The priest shall make atonement before the LORD on behalf of the one to be cleansed. 32“This is the law for the one in whom there is an infection of leprosy, whose means are limited for his [ceremonial] cleansing.”

Cleansing an Infected House 33The LORD further spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying,

34“When you come into the land of Canaan, which I am giving you as a possession, and I put a mark of leprosy on a house in your land, 35then the one who owns the house shall come and tell the priest, ‘I have seen something that looks like a mark of leprosy in my house.’ 36The priest shall order that they empty the house before he goes in to examine the mark, so that everything in the house will not have to be declared unclean; afterward he shall go in to see the house. 37He shall examine the mark, and if the mark on the walls of the house has greenish or reddish depressions and appears deeper than the surface, 38the priest shall go out of the house, to the doorway, and quarantine the house for seven days. 39The priest shall return on the seventh day and look; and if the mark has spread on the walls of the house, 40he shall order them to tear out the contaminated stones and throw them into an unclean place outside the city. 41He shall have the entire inside area of the house scraped, and the plaster that is scraped off shall be dumped in an unclean place outside the city. 42Then they shall take new stones and replace the [contaminated] stones, and he shall take plaster and replaster the house.

43“If, however, the mark breaks out again in the house after he has removed the stones and has scraped and replastered the house, 44then the priest shall come and look again, and if the mark has spread in the house, it is a malignant leprosy in the house; it is [ceremonially] unclean. 45He shall tear down the house—its stones and its timber and all the plaster of the house—and shall take everything outside the city to an unclean place. 46Moreover, whoever goes into the house during the time that it is quarantined becomes unclean until evening. 47And whoever lies down in the house [to rest] shall wash his clothes, and whoever eats in the house shall wash his clothes.

48“But if the priest comes in and inspects it and the mark has not spread in the house after the house has been replastered, he shall pronounce the house clean because the mark has not reappeared. 49To cleanse the house then, he shall take two birds and cedar wood and scarlet string and hyssop; 50and he shall kill one of the birds in an earthenware container over running water, 51and he shall take the cedar wood and the hyssop and the scarlet string, and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird as well as in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times. 52So he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird and with the running water, along with the live bird and the cedar wood and the hyssop and the scarlet string. 53“But he shall let the live bird go free outside the city into the open field. So he shall make atonement for the house, and it will be clean.”

54This is the law for any mark of leprosy—even for a scale, 55and for the leprous garment or house, 56and for a swelling, and for a scab, and for a bright spot on the skin— 57to teach when they are unclean and when they are clean. This is the law of leprosy [in regard to both persons and property].

Leviticus 15
Cleansing Unhealthiness

1The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel, and say to them, ‘When any man has a bodily discharge, his discharge is unclean. 3‘This shall be [the law concerning] his uncleanness in his discharge: whether his body allows its discharge to flow or obstructs its flow; it is uncleanness in him. 4‘Every bed on which the one who has the discharge lies becomes unclean, and everything on which he sits becomes unclean. 5‘Whoever touches his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening; 6and whoever sits on anything on which the man with the discharge has been sitting shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 7‘Also whoever touches the man with the discharge shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 8‘And if he who has the discharge spits on one who is clean, then he shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 9‘Any saddle on which the man with the discharge rides becomes unclean. 10‘Whoever touches anything that has been under him shall be unclean until evening; and whoever carries those things shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 11‘Whomever the one with the discharge touches without rinsing his hands in water shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 12‘An earthenware container that the one with the discharge touches shall be broken, and every wooden container shall be rinsed in water.

13‘When the man with the discharge becomes cleansed from his discharge, he shall count off seven days for his purification; he shall then wash his clothes and bathe his body in running water and will become clean. 14‘On the eighth day he shall take two turtledoves or two young pigeons and come before the LORD to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting, and give them to the priest; 15and the priest shall offer them, one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering. So the priest shall make atonement for the man before the LORD because of his discharge.

16‘Now if any man has a seminal emission, he shall wash all his body in water, and be unclean until evening. 17‘Every garment and every leather on which there is semen shall be washed with water, and shall be unclean until evening. 18‘If a man lies with a woman so that there is a seminal emission, they shall both bathe in water and be unclean until evening.

19‘When a woman has a discharge, if her bodily discharge is blood, she shall continue in her menstrual impurity for seven days; and whoever touches her shall be unclean until evening. 20‘Everything on which she lies during her menstrual impurity shall be unclean; and everything on which she sits shall be unclean. 21‘Anyone who touches her bed shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 22‘Whoever touches anything on which she sits shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 23‘And if it is on her bed or on the thing on which she is sitting, when he touches it, he shall be unclean until evening. 24‘If a man actually lies with her so that her menstrual impurity is on him, he shall be unclean for seven days; and every bed on which he lies shall be unclean.

25‘Now if a woman has a flow of blood for many days, not during the time of her menstruation, or if she has a discharge beyond that period, as long as the impure discharge continues she shall be as she is in the days of her [normal] menstrual impurity; she is unclean. 26‘Every bed on which she lies during the time of her discharge shall be to her like the bed of her menstrual impurity, and whatever she sits on shall be unclean, like the uncleanness of her monthly period. 27‘And whoever touches those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be unclean until evening. 28‘When she is cleansed from her discharge, then she shall count off for herself seven days, and after that she will be clean. 29‘Then on the eighth day she shall take for herself two turtledoves or two young pigeons and bring them to the priest at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting; 30and the priest shall offer one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering; and he shall make atonement for her before the LORD for her unclean discharge.’

31“Thus you shall separate the Israelites from their uncleanness, so that they do not die in their uncleanness by their defiling My tabernacle that is among them.” 32This is the law for the one who has a discharge and for the one who has a seminal emission, so that he is unclean by it; 33and for the woman who is ill because of her monthly period, and for the one who has a discharge, whether man or woman, or for a man who lies with a woman who is [ceremonially] unclean.

Leviticus 16
Law Of Atonement

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron who had died when they [irreverently] approached the presence of the LORD. 2The LORD said to Moses,

“Tell Aaron your brother that he must not enter at any time into the Holy Place inside the veil (the Holy of Holies), before the mercy seat which is on the ark, or he will die, for I will appear in the cloud over the mercy seat. 3Aaron [as high priest] shall enter the Holy Place in this way: with [the blood of] a young bull as a sin offering and [the blood of] a ram as a burnt offering. 4He shall put on the holy linen tunic, and the linen undergarments shall be next to his body, and he shall be belted with the linen sash, and dressed with the linen turban (these are the holy garments). He shall bathe his body in water and put them on. 5He shall take from the congregation of the Israelites [at their expense] two male goats as a sin offering and one ram as a burnt offering. 6Then Aaron shall present the bull as the sin offering for himself, and make atonement for himself and for his house. 7He shall take the two goats and present them before the LORD at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. 8Aaron shall cast lots for the two goats—one lot for the LORD, the other lot for the scapegoat. 9Then Aaron shall bring the goat on which the LORD’S lot fell and offer it as a sin offering. 10But the goat on which the lot fell for the scapegoat shall be presented alive before the LORD to make atonement on it; it shall be sent into the wilderness as the scapegoat.

11“Aaron shall present the bull as the sin offering for himself and make atonement for himself and for his household (the other priests), and he shall kill the bull as the sin offering for himself. 12He shall take a censer full of burning coals from the [bronze] altar before the LORD, and two handfuls of finely ground sweet incense, and bring it inside the veil [into the Most Holy Place], 13and put the incense on the fire [in the censer] before the LORD, so that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is on [the ark of] the Testimony, otherwise he will die. 14He shall take some of the bull’s blood and sprinkle it with his finger on the east side of the mercy seat; also in front of the mercy seat he shall sprinkle some of the blood with his finger seven times.

15“Then he shall kill the goat of the sin offering that is for [the sins of] the people and bring its blood within the veil [into the Most Holy Place] and do with its blood as he did with the blood of the bull, and sprinkle it on the mercy seat and in front of the mercy seat. 16So he shall make atonement for the Holy Place (Holy of Holies) because of the uncleanness and transgressions of the Israelites, for all their sins. He shall also do this for the Tent of Meeting which is among them in the midst of their uncleanness (impurities). 17There shall be no person in the Tent of Meeting when the high priest goes in to make atonement in the Holy Place [within the veil] until he comes out, so that he may make atonement for himself (his own sins) and for his household and for all the congregation of Israel. 18Then he shall go out to the altar [of burnt offering in the court] which is before the LORD and make atonement for it, and shall take some of the blood of the bull and of the goat and put it on the horns of the altar on all sides. 19With his finger he shall sprinkle some of the blood on the altar of burnt offering seven times and cleanse it and consecrate it from the uncleanness of the Israelites.

20“When he has finished atoning for the Holy Place and the Tent of Meeting and the altar, he shall present the live goat. 21Then Aaron shall lay both of his hands on the head of the live goat, and confess over it all the wickedness of the sons of Israel and all their transgressions in regard to all their sins; and he shall lay them on the head of the goat [the scapegoat, the sin-bearer], and send it away into the wilderness by the hand of a man who is prepared [for the task]. 22The goat shall carry on itself all their (the Israelites) wickedness, carrying them to a solitary (infertile) land; and he shall release the goat in the wilderness.

23“Then Aaron shall come into the Tent of Meeting and take off the linen garments which he put on when he went into the Holy Place (Holy of Holies), and shall leave them there. 24He shall bathe his body with water in a holy place and put on his clothes, and come out and offer his burnt offering and that of the people, and make atonement for himself and for the people. 25And he shall offer up in smoke the fat of the sin offering on the altar. 26The man who released the goat as the [sin-bearing] scapegoat shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and afterward he may come into the camp. 27The bull for the sin offering and the goat for the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the Holy Place (Holy of Holies), shall be taken outside the camp; their skins, their meat, and their waste shall be burned in the fire. 28Then he who burns them shall wash his clothes and bathe his body with water, and afterward he may come into the camp.

An Annual Atonement 29“This shall be a permanent statute for you: in the seventh month (nearly October) on the tenth day of the month you shall humble yourselves [by fasting] and not do any work, whether the native-born or the stranger who lives temporarily among you; 30for it is on this day that atonement shall be made for you, to cleanse you; you will be clean from all your sins before the LORD. 31It is a Sabbath of solemn rest for you, and you shall humble yourselves; it is a permanent statute. 32So the priest who is anointed and ordained to serve and minister as priest in his father’s place shall make atonement: he shall wear the holy linen garments, 33and make atonement for the Holy Sanctuary, and he shall make atonement for the Tent of Meeting, and for the altar [of burnt offering in the court]. He shall also make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the assembly. 34“This shall be a permanent statute for you, so that atonement may be made for the children of Israel for all their sins once a year.” So he did just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

Leviticus 17
Blood For Atonement

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the children of Israel, and say to them, ‘This is what the LORD has commanded, saying, 3“Any man from the house of Israel who kills an ox or lamb or goat in the camp, or kills it outside the camp 4and has not brought it to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting to offer it as an offering to the LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD, that man shall be guilty of bloodshed. He has shed blood and shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 5This is so that the sons of Israel may bring their sacrifices which they were sacrificing [to idols] in the open field [where they killed them], that they may bring them in to the LORD, at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting to the priest, and sacrifice them as sacrifices of peace offerings to the LORD. 6The priest shall sprinkle the blood on the altar of the LORD at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting and offer the fat up in smoke as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 7“So they shall no longer offer their sacrifices to goat-idols or demons or field spirits with which they have played the prostitute. This shall be a permanent statute for them throughout their generations.”’

8“Then you shall say to them, ‘Any man from the house of Israel or any of the strangers living temporarily among you, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice 9and does not bring it to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting to offer it to the LORD shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them].

10‘Any man from the house of Israel, or any stranger living temporarily among you, who eats any blood, against that person I shall set My face and I will cut him off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 11‘For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you on the altar to make atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that makes atonement, by reason of the life [which it represents].’ 12Therefore I have said to the sons of Israel, ‘No person among you may eat blood, nor may any stranger living temporarily among you eat blood.’ 13So when any Israelite or any stranger living temporarily among them, catches any ceremonially clean animal or bird when hunting, he shall pour out its blood and cover it with earth.

14“For in regard to the life of all flesh, its blood is [the same] as its life; therefore I said to the Israelites, ‘You are not to eat the blood of any flesh, for the life of all flesh is its blood. Whoever eats it shall be cut off [excluding him from the atonement made for them].’ 15Every person who eats an animal which dies [of natural causes] or was torn by a predator, whether he is native-born or a stranger, he shall wash his clothes and bathe in water, and be [ceremonially] unclean until evening; then he will become clean. 16“But if he does not wash his clothes or bathe his body, he shall bear his guilt [for it will not be borne by the sacrifice of atonement].”

Leviticus 18
Laws On Immoral Relations

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘I am the LORD your God. 3‘You shall not do what is done in the land of Egypt where you lived, and you shall not do what is done in the land of Canaan where I am bringing you. You shall not follow their statutes (practices, customs). 4‘You are to follow My judgments (precepts, ordinances) and keep My statutes and live by them. I am the LORD your God. 5‘So you shall keep My statutes and My judgments, by which, if a person keeps them, he shall live; I am the LORD.

6‘No one shall approach any blood relative of his to uncover nakedness (have intimate relations). I am the LORD. 7‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father, that is, the nakedness of your mother. She is your mother. You shall not uncover her nakedness. 8‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife; it is your father’s nakedness. 9‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your sister, either the daughter of your father or of your mother, whether born at home or born elsewhere. 10‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your son’s daughter or your daughter’s daughter; their nakedness you shall not uncover, for they are your own nakedness [that is, your own descendants]. 11‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife’s daughter; born to your father, she is your sister. 12‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s sister; she is your father’s blood relative. 13‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister, for she is your mother’s blood relative. 14‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s brother’s wife; you shall not approach his wife; she is your aunt. 15‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law; she is your son’s wife. You shall not uncover her nakedness. 16‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your brother’s wife; it is your brother’s nakedness. 17‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter, nor shall you take her son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter to uncover their nakedness (have intimate relations with them); they are [her] blood relatives; it is an outrageous offense. 18‘You shall not marry a woman in addition to her sister as a rival while she is alive, to uncover her nakedness.

19‘Also you shall not approach a woman to uncover her nakedness during her menstrual impurity and ceremonial uncleanness. 20‘You shall not have intimate relations with your neighbor’s wife, to be defiled with her. 21‘You shall not give any of your children to offer them [by fire as a sacrifice] to Molech [the god of the Ammonites], nor shall you profane the name of your God [by honoring idols as gods]. I am the LORD. 22‘You shall not lie [intimately] with a male as one lies with a female; it is repulsive. 23‘You shall not have intimate relations with any animal to be defiled with it; nor shall a woman stand before an animal to mate with it; it is a perversion.

24‘Do not defile yourselves by any of these things; for by all these the nations which I am casting out before you have become defiled. 25‘For the land has become defiled; therefore I have brought its punishment upon it, and the land vomits out its inhabitants. 26‘But as for you, you are to keep My statutes and My judgments (precepts) and shall not commit any of these repulsive acts, neither the native-born, nor the stranger who lives temporarily among you 27(for all these repulsive acts have been done by the men who lived in the land before you, and the land has become defiled); 28[do none of these things] so that the land will not vomit you out, should you defile it, as it has vomited out the nation which has been before you. 29‘For whoever commits any of these repulsive acts, those persons who do so shall be cut off from among their people [excluding them from the atonement made for them]. 30‘So keep My command: do not practice any of the repulsive customs which have been practiced before you, so as not to defile yourselves by them; I am the LORD your God.’”

Leviticus 19
Idolatry Forbidden

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

2“Say to all the congregation of the children of Israel, ‘You shall be holy, for I the LORD your God am holy. 3‘Each of you shall respect his mother and his father, and you shall keep My Sabbaths; I am the LORD your God. 4‘Do not turn to idols or make for yourselves molten gods (images cast in metal); I am the LORD your God.

5‘Now when you offer a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD, you shall offer it so that you may be accepted. 6‘It shall be eaten the same day you offer it and on the day following; and if anything remains until the third day, it shall be burned in the fire. 7‘But if it is eaten at all on the third day, it is repulsive; it will not be accepted [by God as an offering]. 8‘Everyone who eats it will bear [the responsibility for] his wickedness, for he has profaned a holy thing of the LORD; and that person shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them].

Various Laws 9‘Now when you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap to the very corners of your field, nor shall you gather the gleanings (grain left after reaping) of your harvest. 10‘And you shall not glean your vineyard, nor shall you gather its fallen grapes; you shall leave them for the poor and for the stranger. I am the LORD your God.

11‘You shall not steal, nor deal deceptively, nor lie to one another. 12‘You shall not swear [an oath] falsely by My name, so as to profane the name of your God; I am the LORD.

13‘You shall not oppress or exploit your neighbor, nor rob him. You shall not withhold the wages of a hired man overnight until morning. 14‘You shall not curse a deaf man nor put a stumbling block before the blind, but you shall fear your God [with profound reverence]; I am the LORD.

15‘You shall not do injustice in judgment; you shall not be partial to the poor nor show a preference for the great, but judge your neighbor fairly. 16‘You shall not go around as a gossip among your people, and you are not to act against the life of your neighbor [with slander or false testimony]; I am the LORD.

17‘You shall not hate your brother in your heart; you may most certainly rebuke your neighbor, but shall not incur sin because of him. 18‘You shall not take revenge nor bear any grudge against the sons of your people, but you shall love your neighbor (acquaintance, associate, companion) as yourself; I am the LORD.

19‘You are to keep My statutes. You shall not breed together two kinds of your cattle; you shall not sow your field with two kinds of seed, nor wear clothing of two kinds of material mixed together.

20‘Now if a man has intimate relations with a woman who is a slave acquired for [marriage to] another man, but who has not been redeemed nor given her freedom, there shall be punishment [after an investigation]; they shall not be put to death, because she was not free; 21but he shall bring his guilt offering to the LORD to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting, a ram as a guilt offering. 22‘The priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt offering before the LORD for his sin which he has committed; and he shall be forgiven for his sin.

23‘When you enter the land and plant all kinds of trees for food, then you shall consider their fruit forbidden. For three years the fruit shall be forbidden to you; it shall not be eaten. 24‘In the fourth year all the fruit shall be holy, an offering of praise to the LORD. 25‘In the fifth year you may eat the fruit [of the trees], this is so that their yield may increase for you; I am the LORD your God.

26‘You shall not eat anything with the blood, nor practice divination [using omens or witchcraft] or soothsaying. 27‘You shall not trim and round off the side-growth of [the hair on] your heads, nor mar the edges of your beard. 28‘You shall not make any cuts on your body [in mourning] for the dead, nor make any tattoo marks on yourselves; I am the LORD.

29‘Do not profane your daughter by making her a prostitute, so that the land will not fall to prostitution and become full of wickedness. 30‘You shall keep My Sabbaths and revere My sanctuary. I am the LORD.

31‘Do not turn to mediums [who pretend to consult the dead] or to spiritists [who have spirits of divination]; do not seek them out to be defiled by them. I am the LORD your God.

32‘You shall rise before the gray-headed and honor the aged, and you shall fear your God [with profound reverence]; I am the LORD.

33‘When a stranger resides with you in your land, you shall not oppress or mistreat him. 34‘But the stranger who resides with you shall be to you like someone native-born among you; and you shall love him as yourself, for you were strangers in the land of Egypt; I am the LORD your God.

35‘You shall do no wrong in judgment, in measurement of weight or quantity. 36‘You shall have just and accurate balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin. I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt. 37‘You shall observe and keep all My statutes and all My ordinances and do them. I am the LORD.’”

Leviticus 20
On Human Sacrifice And Immoralities

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Moreover, you shall say to the children of Israel,

‘Any Israelite or any stranger residing in Israel who gives any of his children to Molech (the god of the Ammonites) [as a human sacrifice] shall most certainly be put to death; the people of the land shall stone him with stones. 3‘I will also set My face against that man [opposing him, withdrawing My protection from him] and will cut him off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them], because he has given some of his children to Molech, so as to defile My sanctuary and profane My holy name. 4‘If the people of the land should ever tolerate that man when he gives any of his children [as a burnt offering] to Molech, and fail to put him to death [as My law requires], 5then I shall set My face against that man and against his [extended] family, and I will cut off from their people both him and all who follow him in playing the prostitute (commit apostasy) with Molech.

6‘As for the person who turns to mediums [who consult the dead] or to spiritists, to play the prostitute after them, I shall set My face against that person and will cut him off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 7‘You shall consecrate yourselves therefore, and be holy; for I am the LORD your God. 8‘You shall keep My statutes and do them. I am the LORD who sanctifies you.

9‘If anyone curses his father or mother, he shall most certainly be put to death; he has cursed his father or mother; his blood is on him [that is, he bears full responsibility for the consequences].

10‘The man who commits adultery with another’s wife, even his neighbor’s wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall most certainly be put to death. 11‘The man who lies [intimately] with his father’s wife has uncovered his father’s nakedness; both of them shall most certainly be put to death; their blood is on them. 12‘If a man lies [intimately] with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall most certainly be put to death; they have committed incest; their blood is on them. 13‘If a man lies [intimately] with a male as if he were a woman, both men have committed a detestable (perverse, unnatural) act; they shall most certainly be put to death; their blood is on them. 14‘It is immoral and shameful if a man marries a woman and her mother; all three shall be burned in fire, so that there will be no immorality among you. 15‘If a man has intimate relations with an animal, he shall most certainly be put to death; you shall kill the animal also. 16‘If a woman approaches any animal to mate with it, you shall kill the woman and the animal; they shall most certainly be put to death; their blood is on them.

17‘If a man takes his sister, his father’s daughter or his mother’s daughter, so that he sees her nakedness and she sees his nakedness, it is a disgrace; and they shall be cut off in the sight of the sons of their people. He has uncovered his sister’s nakedness; he bears [responsibility for] his guilt. 18‘If a man lies [intimately] with a woman during her menstrual cycle and uncovers her nakedness, he has exposed her flow, and she has uncovered the flow of her blood; both of them shall be cut off from their people [excluding them from the atonement made for them]. 19‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of (have intimate relations with) your mother’s sister or your father’s sister, for such a one has uncovered his blood relative; they will bear their guilt. 20‘If there is a man who lies [intimately] with his uncle’s wife, he has uncovered his uncle’s nakedness; they will bear their sin. They will die childless. 21‘If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is a hated and unclean thing; he has uncovered his brother’s nakedness. They will be childless.

22‘Therefore keep all My statutes and all My ordinances and do them, so that the land where I am bringing you to live may not vomit you out [as it did those before you]. 23‘You shall not follow the statutes (laws, practices, customs) of the nation which I am driving out before you; for they did all these things, and therefore I have loathed them. 24‘But I have said to you, “You are to inherit and take possession of their land, and I will give it to you to possess, a land [of plenty] flowing with milk and honey.” I am the LORD your God, who has separated you from the peoples (pagan nations). 25‘You are therefore to make a distinction between the [ceremonially] clean animal and the unclean, and between the unclean bird and the clean; and you shall not make yourselves detestable by animal or by bird or by anything that crawls on the ground, which I have set apart from you as unclean. 26‘You are to be holy to Me; for I the LORD am holy, and have set you apart from the peoples (nations) to be Mine.

27‘A man or woman who is a medium [who pretends to consult the dead] or who is a spiritist shall most certainly be put to death, and be stoned with stones; their blood is on them.’”

Leviticus 21
Regulations Concerning Priests

1Then the LORD said to Moses, “Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them:

‘No one shall defile himself [that is, become ceremonially unclean] for the dead among his people [by touching a corpse or assisting in preparing it for burial], 2except for his relatives who are nearest to him, his mother, his father, his son, his daughter, and his brother, 3also his virgin sister, who is near to him because she has had no husband; for her he may become unclean. 4‘He shall not become unclean as a relative by marriage among his people, and so profane himself. 5‘The priests shall not shave their heads, nor shave off the edges of their beards, nor make any cuts in their body. 6‘They shall be holy to their God and not profane the name of their God; for they present the offerings by fire to the LORD, the food of their God; so they shall be holy. 7‘They shall not take [as a wife] a woman who is a prostitute, nor a woman who is divorced from her husband; for the priest is holy to his God. 8‘You shall consecrate him, therefore, for he offers the food of your God; he shall be holy to you; for I the LORD, who sanctifies you, am holy. 9‘The daughter of any priest who profanes herself by prostitution profanes her father; she shall be burned in fire.

10‘But he who is the high priest among his brothers, on whose head the anointing oil has been poured and who has been consecrated to wear the [sacred] garments, shall not uncover his head nor tear his clothes [in mourning], 11nor shall he approach any dead person, nor defile himself [by doing so, even] for his father or for his mother; 12nor shall he go out of the sanctuary nor profane (make ceremonially unclean) the sanctuary of his God, for the consecration of the anointing oil of his God is on him; I am the LORD. 13‘He shall take a wife in her virginity. 14‘He may not marry a widow or a divorced woman or one who is profaned by prostitution, but he is to marry a virgin from his own people, 15so that he will not profane or dishonor his children among his people; for I am the LORD who sanctifies the high priest.’”

16Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 17“Say to Aaron, ‘Throughout their generations none of your descendants who has any [physical] defect shall approach [the altar] to present the food of his God. 18‘For no man who has a defect shall approach [God’s altar as a priest]: no man who is blind or lame, or who has a disfigured face, or any deformed limb, 19or a man who has a broken foot or a broken hand, 20or a hunchback or a dwarf, or one who has a defect in his eye or eczema or scabs or crushed testicles. 21‘No man among the descendants of Aaron the priest who has a [physical] defect and is disfigured or deformed is to approach [the altar] to present the offerings of the LORD by fire. He has a defect; he shall not approach [the altar] to present the food of his God. 22‘He may eat the food of his God, both of the most holy and of the holy things, 23but he shall not go within the veil or approach the altar [of incense], because he has a defect, so that he will not profane My sanctuaries; for I am the LORD who sanctifies them.’” 24So Moses spoke to Aaron and to his sons, and to all the Israelites.

Leviticus 22
Various Rules For Priests

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Tell Aaron and his sons to be careful with the holy things (offerings, gifts) which the children of Israel dedicate to Me, so that they do not profane My holy name; I am the LORD. 3Say to them, ‘Any one of your descendants throughout your generations who approaches the holy things which the Israelites dedicate to the LORD, while he is [ceremonially] unclean, that person shall be cut off from My presence and excluded from the sanctuary; I am the LORD. 4‘No man of the descendants of Aaron who is a leper or has a discharge may eat the holy things [the offerings and the showbread] until he is clean. And whoever touches any person or thing made unclean by contact with a corpse or a man who has had a seminal emission, 5or whoever touches any crawling thing by which he is made unclean, or any person by whom he is made unclean, whatever it may be, 6the person who touches any such thing shall be unclean until evening and shall not eat the holy things unless he has bathed his body in water. 7‘When the sun sets, he will be clean, and afterward he may eat the holy things, for it is his food. 8‘He shall not eat that which dies [of natural causes] or is torn by a predator, becoming unclean by it; I am the LORD. 9‘Therefore the priests shall observe My ordinance, so that they will not bear sin because of it and die if they profane it; I am the LORD who sanctifies them.

10‘No layman [that is, someone outside of Aaron’s family] is to eat the holy gift [which has been offered to God]; a foreigner residing with the priest or a hired man shall not eat the holy thing. 11‘But if a priest buys a slave as his property with his money, the slave may eat the holy thing, and those who are born in the priest’s house; they may eat his food. 12‘If a priest’s daughter is married to a layman [one not part of the priestly tribe], she shall not eat the offering of the holy things. 13‘But if a priest’s daughter is a widow or divorced, and has no child, and returns to her father’s house as in her youth, she shall eat her father’s food; but no layman shall eat it. 14‘But if a person unknowingly eats a holy gift [which has been offered to God], then he shall add one-fifth of its value to it and give the holy gift to the priest. 15‘The priests shall not profane the holy things the Israelites offer to the LORD, 16and so cause them [by neglect of any essential observance] to bear the punishment of guilt when they eat their holy things; for I am the LORD who sanctifies them.’”

Flawless Animals for Sacrifice 17Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 18“Speak to Aaron and his sons and to all the Israelites and say to them, ‘Any man of the house of Israel or any stranger in Israel who presents his offering, whether to fulfill any of their vows or as any of their freewill (voluntary) offerings which they presented to the LORD as a burnt offering— 19so that you may be accepted—it must be a male without blemish from the cattle, the sheep, or the goats. 20‘You shall not offer anything which has a blemish, because it will not be accepted for you. 21‘Whoever offers a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD to fulfill a special vow to the LORD or as a freewill offering from the herd or from the flock, it must be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish in it. 22‘Animals that are blind or fractured or mutilated, or have a sore or a running wound or an itch or scabs, you shall not offer to the LORD nor make an offering of them by fire on the altar to the LORD. 23‘For a freewill offering you may offer either a bull or a lamb which has an overgrown or stunted member (deformity), but for [the payment of] a vow it will not be accepted. 24‘You shall not offer to the LORD any animal which has its testicles bruised or crushed or torn or cut off, or sacrifice it in your land. 25‘Nor shall you offer as the food of your God any such [animals obtained] from a foreigner, because their corruption and blemish makes them unfit; there is a defect in them, they shall not be accepted for you.’”

26Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 27“When a bull or a sheep or a goat is born, it shall remain for seven days with its mother; and after the eighth day it shall be accepted as an offering by fire to the LORD. 28And whether [the mother] is a cow or a sheep, you shall not kill both it and its young in one day. 29When you sacrifice an offering of thanksgiving to the LORD, you shall sacrifice it so that you may be accepted. 30It shall be eaten on the same day; you shall leave none of it until the next morning; I am the LORD. 31So you shall keep My commandments and do them; I am the LORD.

32“You shall not profane My holy name [using it to honor an idol, or treating it with irreverence or contempt or as a byword]; but I will be sanctified (set apart as holy) among the Israelites. I am the LORD, who sanctifies and declares you holy, 33who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God; I am the LORD.”

Leviticus 23
Laws Of Religious Festivals

1The LORD spoke again to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘The appointed times (established feasts) of the LORD which you shall proclaim as holy convocations—My appointed times are these:

The Sabbath 3‘For six days work may be done, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of complete rest, a holy convocation (calling together). You shall not do any work [on that day]; it is the Sabbath of the LORD wherever you may be.

The Passover and Unleavened Bread 4‘These are the appointed times of the LORD, holy convocations which you shall proclaim at their appointed times: 5‘The LORD’S Passover is on the fourteenth day of the first month at twilight. 6‘The Feast of Unleavened Bread to the LORD is on the fifteenth day of the same month; for seven days you shall eat unleavened bread. 7‘On the first day you shall have a holy convocation (calling together); you shall not do any laborious work [on that day]. 8‘But you shall present an offering by fire to the LORD for seven days; on the seventh day there shall be a holy convocation; you shall not do any laborious work [on that day].’”

The Feast of First Fruits 9Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 10“Speak to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘When you enter the land which I am giving you and reap its harvest, you shall bring the sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest to the priest. 11‘He shall wave the sheaf before the LORD so that you may be accepted; the priest shall wave it on the day after the Sabbath. 12‘Now on the day when you wave the sheaf you shall offer a male lamb one year old without blemish as a burnt offering to the LORD. 13‘Its grain offering shall be two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with [olive] oil, an offering by fire to the LORD for a sweet and soothing aroma, with its drink offering [to be poured out], a fourth of a hin of wine. 14‘You shall not eat any bread or roasted grain or new growth, until this same day when you bring in the offering to your God; it is a permanent statute throughout your generations wherever you may be.

The Feast of Weeks 15‘You shall count from the day after the Sabbath, from the day when you brought in the sheaf (tied bundle of grain) of the wave offering; there shall be seven complete Sabbaths (seven full weeks). 16‘You shall count fifty days to the day after the seventh Sabbath; then you shall present a new grain offering to the LORD. 17‘You shall bring in from your places two loaves of bread as a wave offering, made from two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour; they shall be baked with leaven as first fruits to the LORD. 18‘And you shall offer with the bread seven unblemished lambs, one year old, and one young bull and two rams. They are to be a burnt offering to the LORD, with their grain offering and their drink offerings. It is an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 19‘And you shall sacrifice one male goat as a sin offering and two male lambs, one year old as a sacrifice of peace offerings. 20‘The priest shall wave them before the LORD as a wave offering, together with the bread of the first fruits and the two lambs. They are to be holy to the LORD for the priest. 21‘On this same day you shall make a proclamation, you are to have a holy convocation (calling together); you shall not do any laborious work [on that day]. It is to be a permanent statute throughout your generations wherever you may be.

22‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not reap to the edges of your field, nor gather the gleaning of your harvest; you are to leave them for the poor and for the stranger. I am the LORD your God.’”

The Feast of Trumpets 23Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 24“Say to the children of Israel, ‘On the first day of the seventh month (almost October), you shall observe a day of solemn sabbatical rest, a memorial day announced by the blowing of trumpets, a holy convocation. 25‘You shall not do any laborious work [on that day], but you shall present an offering by fire to the LORD.’”

The Day of Atonement 26The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 27“Also the tenth day of this seventh month is the Day of Atonement; it shall be a holy convocation for you, and you shall humble yourselves [by fasting] and present an offering by fire to the LORD. 28You shall not do any work on this same day, for it is the Day of Atonement, to make atonement on your behalf before the LORD your God. 29If there is any person who will not humble himself on this same day, he shall be cut off from his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 30If there is any person who does any work on this same day, I will destroy that person from among his people. 31You shall do no work at all [on that day]. It is a permanent statute throughout your generations wherever you may be. 32“It is to be to you a Sabbath of complete rest, and you shall humble yourselves. On the ninth day of the month at evening, from evening to evening you shall keep your Sabbath.”

The Feast of Booths 33Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 34“Say to the children of Israel, ‘On the fifteenth day of this seventh month, and for seven days, is the Feast of Booths (Tabernacles) to the LORD. 35‘The first day is a holy convocation (calling together); you shall not do any laborious work [on that day]. 36‘For seven days you shall present an offering by fire to the LORD. On the eighth day you shall have a holy convocation and present an offering by fire to the LORD. It is a festive assembly; you shall not do any laborious work [on that day].

37‘These are the appointed times (established feasts) of the LORD, which you shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to present an offering by fire to the LORD, a burnt offering and a grain offering, sacrifices and drink offerings, each on its own day. 38‘This is in addition to the [weekly] Sabbaths of the LORD, and in addition to your gifts and all your vowed offerings and all your freewill offerings, which you give to the LORD.

39‘On exactly the fifteenth day of the seventh month (nearly October), when you have gathered in the crops of the land, you shall celebrate the feast of the LORD for seven days, with a Sabbath rest on the first day and a Sabbath rest on the eighth day. 40‘Now on the first day you shall take for yourselves the foliage of beautiful trees, branches of palm trees, and boughs of thick (leafy) trees, and willows of the brook [and make booths of them]; and you shall rejoice before the LORD your God for seven days. 41‘You shall celebrate it as a feast to the LORD for seven days in the year. It shall be a permanent statute throughout your generations; you shall celebrate it in the seventh month. 42‘You shall live in booths (temporary shelters) for seven days; all native-born in Israel shall live in booths, 43so that your generations may know that I had the sons of Israel live in booths when I brought them out of the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.’” 44So Moses declared to the Israelites the appointed feasts of the LORD.

Leviticus 24
The Lamp And The Bread Of The Sanctuary

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Command the children of Israel to bring to you clear oil from beaten olives for the light [of the golden lampstand], to make a lamp burn continually. 3Outside the veil of the Testimony [between the Holy Place and the Most Holy Place] in the Tent of Meeting, Aaron shall always keep the lamps burning before the LORD from evening until morning; it shall be a permanent statute throughout your generations. 4He shall keep the lamps burning on the pure gold lampstand before the LORD continually.

5“Then you shall take fine flour and bake twelve cakes (bread of the Presence, showbread) with it; two-tenths of an ephah shall be in each cake (loaf). 6You shall set the bread of the Presence (showbread) in two rows, six in a row, on the pure gold table before the LORD. 7You shall put pure frankincense [in two censers, one] beside each row, so that it may be with the bread as a memorial portion, an offering by fire to the LORD. 8Every Sabbath day Aaron shall arrange the showbread before the LORD continually; it is an everlasting covenant for the Israelites. 9“The bread of the Presence shall be for Aaron and his sons, and they shall eat it in a sacred place, for it is for Aaron a most holy portion of the offerings by fire to the LORD, his portion forever.”

10Now the son of an Israelite woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the Israelites, and he and a man of Israel quarreled and struggled with each other in the camp. 11The Israelite woman’s son blasphemed the Name [of the LORD] and cursed. So they brought him to Moses. (Now his mother’s name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.) 12They put him in custody until the will and command of the LORD might be made clear to them.

13Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 14“Bring the one who has cursed [the LORD] outside the camp, and let all who heard him lay their hands on his head [as witnesses to his guilt]; then let all the congregation stone him. 15You shall speak to the Israelites, saying, ‘Whoever curses his God will bear his sin [through his own death]. 16‘Further, the one who blasphemes the name of the LORD shall most certainly be put to death; all the congregation shall stone him. The stranger as well as the native-born shall be put to death when he blasphemes the Name [of the LORD].

“An Eye for an Eye” 17‘If a man takes the life of any human being [unlawfully], he shall most certainly be put to death. 18‘The one who kills an animal shall replace it, animal for animal. 19‘If a man injures his neighbor (fellow citizen), whatever he has done shall be done to him: 20fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; just as he has injured a man, so shall the same be done to him. 21‘The one who kills an animal shall replace it; but he who kills a human being [unlawfully] shall be put to death. 22‘You shall have one standard of law for the stranger among you as well as for the native, for I am the LORD your God.’” 23Then Moses spoke to the Israelites, and they brought the one who had cursed [the LORD] outside the camp and stoned him with stones. Thus the Israelites did just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

Leviticus 25
The Sabbatic Year And Year Of Jubilee

1The LORD spoke to Moses at Mount Sinai, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘When you come into the land which I am giving you, then the land shall keep a Sabbath to the LORD. 3‘For six years you shall sow your field, and for six years you shall prune your vineyard and gather in its crop. 4‘But in the seventh year there shall be a Sabbath of rest for the land, a Sabbath to the LORD; you shall not sow [seed in] your field nor prune your vineyard. 5‘Whatever reseeds itself (uncultivated) in your harvest you shall not reap, nor shall you gather the grapes from your uncultivated vine, it shall be a year of sabbatical rest for the land. 6‘And all of you shall have for food whatever the [untilled] land produces during its Sabbath year; yourself, and your male and female slaves, your hired servant, and the foreigners who reside among you, 7even your domestic animals and the [wild] animals that are in your land shall have all its crops to eat.

The Year of Jubilee 8‘You are also to count off seven Sabbaths of years for yourself, seven times seven years, so that you have the time of the seven Sabbaths of years, namely, forty-nine years. 9‘Then you shall sound the ram’s horn everywhere on the tenth day of the seventh month (almost October); on the Day of Atonement you shall sound the trumpet throughout your land. 10‘And you shall consecrate the fiftieth year and proclaim freedom [for the slaves] throughout the land to all its inhabitants. It shall be a Jubilee (year of remission) for you, and each of you shall return to his own [ancestral] property [that was sold to another because of poverty], and each of you shall return to his family [from whom he was separated by bondage]. 11‘That fiftieth year shall be a Jubilee for you; you shall not sow [seed], nor reap what reseeds itself, nor gather the grapes of the uncultivated vines. 12‘For it is the Jubilee; it shall be holy to you; you shall eat its crops out of the field.

13‘In this Year of Jubilee each of you shall return to his own [ancestral] property. 14‘If you sell anything to your friend or buy from your friend, you shall not wrong one another. 15‘According to the number of years after the Jubilee, you shall buy from your friend. And he is to sell to you according to the number of years of crops [which may be harvested before you must restore the property to him]. 16‘If the years [until the next Jubilee] are many, you shall increase the price, but if the years remaining are few, you shall reduce the price, because it is the number of crops that he is selling to you. 17‘You shall not wrong one another, but you shall fear your God [with profound reverence]; for I am the LORD your God.

18‘Therefore you shall carry out My statutes and keep My ordinances and do them, so that you may live securely on the land. 19‘Then the land will yield its produce, so that you can eat your fill and live securely on it. 20‘And if you say, “What are we going to eat in the seventh year if we do not sow [seed] or gather in our crops?” 21then [this is My answer:] I will order My [special] blessing for you in the sixth year, so that it will produce [sufficient] crops for three years. 22‘When you are sowing the eighth year, you can still eat old things from the crops, eating the old until the ninth year when its crop comes in.

The Law of Redemption 23‘The land shall not be sold permanently, for the land is Mine; you are [only] foreigners and temporary residents with Me. 24‘So in all the country that you possess, you are to provide for the redemption of the land [in the Year of Jubilee].

25‘If a fellow countryman of yours becomes so poor he has to sell some of his property, then his nearest relative is to come and buy back (redeem) what his relative has sold. 26‘Or in case a man has no relative [to redeem his property], but he has become more prosperous and has enough to buy it back, 27then he shall calculate the years since its sale and refund the balance to the man to whom he sold it, and so return to his [ancestral] property. 28‘But if he is unable to redeem it, then what he has sold shall remain in the hands of the purchaser until the Year of Jubilee; but at the Jubilee it shall revert, and he may return to his property.

29‘If a man sells a house in a walled city, then his right of redemption remains valid for a full year after its sale; his right of redemption lasts a full year. 30‘But if it is not redeemed for him within a full year, then the house that is in the walled city passes permanently and irrevocably to the purchaser throughout his generations. It does not revert back in the Year of Jubilee. 31‘The houses of the villages that have no surrounding walls, however, shall be considered as open fields. They may be redeemed, and revert in the Year of Jubilee. 32‘As for the cities of the Levites, the Levites have a permanent right of redemption for the houses in the cities which they possess. 33‘Therefore, what is [purchased] from the Levites may be redeemed [by a Levite], and the house that was sold in the city they possess reverts in the Year of Jubilee, for the houses in the Levite cities are their [ancestral] property among the Israelites. 34‘But the pasture lands of their cities may not be sold, for that is their permanent possession.

Of Poor Countrymen 35‘Now if your fellow countryman becomes poor and his hand falters with you [that is, he has trouble repaying you for something], then you are to help and sustain him, [with courtesy and consideration] like [you would] a stranger or a temporary resident [without property], so that he may live among you. 36‘Do not charge him usurious interest, but fear your God [with profound reverence], so your countryman may [continue to] live among you. 37‘You shall not give him your money at interest, nor your food at a profit. 38‘I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan and to be your God.

39‘And if your fellow countryman becomes so poor [in his dealings] with you that he sells himself to you [as payment for a debt], you shall not let him do the work of a slave [who is ineligible for redemption], 40but he is to be with you as a hired man, as if he were a temporary resident; he shall serve with you until the Year of Jubilee, 41and then he shall leave you, he and his children with him, and shall go back to his own family and return to the property of his fathers. 42‘For the Israelites are My servants whom I brought out of the land of Egypt; they shall not be sold in a slave sale. 43‘You shall not rule over him with harshness (severity, oppression), but you are to fear your God [with profound reverence]. 44‘As for your male and female slaves whom you may have—you may acquire male and female slaves from the pagan nations that are around you. 45‘Moreover, from the children of the strangers who live as aliens among you, from them you may buy slaves and from their families who are with you, whom they have produced in your land; they may become your possession. 46‘You may even bequeath them as an inheritance to your children after you, to receive as a possession; you can use them as permanent slaves. But in respect to your fellow countrymen, the children of Israel, you shall not rule over one another with harshness (severity, oppression).

Of Redeeming a Poor Man 47‘Now if the financial means of a stranger or temporary resident among you become sufficient, and your fellow countryman becomes poor in comparison to him and sells himself to the stranger who is living among you or to the descendants of the stranger’s family, 48then after he is sold he shall have the right of redemption. One of his relatives may redeem him: 49either his uncle or his uncle’s son may redeem him, or one of his blood relatives from his family may redeem him; or if he prospers, he may redeem himself. 50‘Then he [or his redeemer] shall calculate with his purchaser from the year when he sold himself to the purchaser to the Year of Jubilee, and the [original] price of his sale shall be adjusted according to the number of years. The time he was with his owner shall be considered as that of a hired man. 51‘If there are still many years [before the Year of Jubilee], in proportion to them he must refund [to the purchaser] part of the price of his sale for his redemption and release. 52‘And if only a few years remain until the Year of Jubilee, he shall so calculate it with him. He is to refund the proportionate amount for his release. 53‘Like a man hired year by year he shall deal with him; he shall not rule over him with harshness in your sight. 54‘Even if he is not redeemed during these years and under these provisions, then he shall go free in the Year of Jubilee, he and his children with him. 55‘For the children of Israel are My servants; My servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.

Leviticus 26
Blessings Of Obedience

1‘You shall not make idols for yourselves, nor shall you erect an image, a sacred pillar or an obelisk, nor shall you place any figured stone in your land so that you may bow down to it; for I am the LORD your God. 2‘You shall keep My Sabbaths and have reverence for My sanctuary. I am the LORD. 3‘If you walk in My statutes and keep My commandments and [obediently] do them, 4then I will give you rain in its season, and the land will yield her produce and the trees of the field bear their fruit. 5‘And your threshing season will last until grape gathering and the grape gathering [time] will last until planting, and you will eat your bread and be filled and live securely in your land. 6‘I will also grant peace in the land, so that you may lie down and there will be no one to make you afraid. I will also eliminate harmful animals from the land, and no sword will pass through your land. 7‘And you will chase your enemies, and they will fall before you by the sword. 8‘Five of you will chase a hundred, and a hundred of you will put ten thousand to flight; your enemies will fall before you by the sword. 9‘For I will turn toward you [with favor and regard] and make you fruitful and multiply you, and I will establish and confirm My covenant with you. 10‘You will eat the old supply of [abundant] produce, and clear out the old [to make room] for the new. 11‘I will make My dwelling among you, and My soul will not reject nor separate itself from you. 12‘I will walk among you and be your God, and you shall be My people. 13‘I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt so that you would not be their slaves; and I broke the bars of your yoke and made you walk upright [with heads held high as free men].

Penalties of Disobedience 14‘But if you do not obey Me and do not [obediently] do all these commandments, 15if, instead, you reject My statutes, and if your soul rejects My ordinances, so that you will not [obediently] do all My commandments, and in this way break My covenant, 16I, in turn, will do this to you: I will appoint over you sudden terror, consumption, and fever that will waste away the eyes and cause the soul to languish also. And you will sow your seed uselessly, for your enemies will eat what you plant. 17‘I will set My face against you so that you will be struck down before your enemies; those who hate you will rule over you, and you will flee when no one is pursuing you. 18‘If in spite of all this you still will not listen to Me and be obedient, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins. 19‘I will break your pride in your power, and I will make your sky like iron [giving no rain and blocking all prayers] and your ground like bronze [hard to plow and yielding no produce]. 20‘Your strength will be spent uselessly, for your land will not yield its produce and the trees of the land will not yield their fruit.

21‘If then, you act with hostility toward Me and are unwilling to obey Me, I will increase the plague on you seven times in accordance with your sins. 22‘I will let loose the [wild] animals of the field among you, which will bereave you of your children and destroy your livestock and make you so few in number that your roads will lie deserted and desolate.

23‘And if by these things you are not turned to Me, but act with hostility against Me, 24then I also will act with hostility against you, and I will strike you seven times for your sins. 25‘I will bring a sword on you that will execute vengeance for [breaking] the covenant; and when you gather together in your cities, I will send pestilence (virulent disease) among you, and you shall be handed over to the enemy. 26‘When I break your staff of bread [that is, cut off your supply of food], ten women will bake your bread in one oven, and they will ration your bread; and you will eat and not be satisfied.

27‘Yet if in spite of this you will not [attentively] listen to Me but act with hostility against me, 28then I will act with hostility against you in wrath, and I also will punish you seven times for your sins. 29‘You will eat the flesh of your sons and the flesh of your daughters. 30‘I will destroy your high places [devoted to idolatrous worship], and cut down your incense altars, and heap your dead bodies upon the [crushed] bodies of your idols, and My soul will detest you [with deep and unutterable loathing]. 31‘I will lay waste your cities as well and will make your sanctuaries desolate, and I will not smell your sweet and soothing aromas [of offerings by fire]. 32‘I will make the land desolate, and your enemies who settle in it will be appalled at it. 33‘I will scatter you among the nations and draw out the sword [of your enemies] after you; your land will become desolate and your cities will become ruins.

34‘Then the land [of Israel] will enjoy its Sabbaths as long as it lies desolate, while you are in your enemies’ land; then the land will rest and enjoy its Sabbaths. 35‘As long as it lies desolate, it will have rest, the rest it did not have on your Sabbaths, while you were living on it. 36‘As for those who are left of you, I will bring despair (lack of courage, weakness) into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; the sound of a scattered leaf will put them to flight, and they will flee as if [running] from the sword, and will fall even when no one is chasing them. 37‘They shall stumble over one another as if to escape from a sword when no one is chasing them; and you will have no power to stand before your enemies. 38‘You will perish among the nations; the land of your enemies will consume you. 39‘Those of you who are left will rot away because of their wickedness in the lands of your enemies; also because of the wickedness of their forefathers they will rot away like them.

40‘If they confess their wickedness and the wickedness of their forefathers, in their unfaithfulness which they have committed against Me—and also in their acting with hostility toward Me— 41I also was acting with hostility toward them and brought them into the land of their enemies—then if their uncircumcised (sin-filled) hearts are humbled and they accept the punishment for their wickedness, 42then I will remember My covenant with Jacob, and also My covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant with Abraham, and remember the land. 43‘But the land will be abandoned by them and will enjoy its Sabbaths while it lies desolate without them; and they will accept the punishment for their wickedness and make amends because they rejected My ordinances and their soul rejected My statutes. 44‘Yet in spite of this, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject them, nor will I so despise them as to destroy them, breaking My covenant with them; for I am the LORD their God. 45‘But I will, for their sake, [earnestly] remember the covenant with their forefathers, whom I have brought out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God. I am the LORD.’”

46These are the statutes, ordinances, and laws which the LORD established between Himself and the Israelites through Moses at Mount Sinai.

Leviticus 27
Rules Concerning Valuations

1Again, the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the children of Israel and say to them, ‘When a man makes a special vow [consecrating himself or a member of his family], he shall be valued according to your [established system of] valuation of people belonging to the LORD [that is, the priest accepts from the man making the vow a specified amount of money for the temple treasury in place of the actual person]. 3‘If your valuation is of a male between twenty and sixty years of age, then your valuation shall be fifty shekels of silver, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. 4‘Or if the person is a female, then your valuation shall be thirty shekels. 5‘If the person is between five years and twenty years of age, then your valuation for the male shall be twenty shekels and for the female ten shekels. 6‘But if the child is between one month and five years of age, then your valuation shall be five shekels of silver for the male and three shekels for the female. 7‘If the person is sixty years old and above, your valuation shall be fifteen shekels for the male, and ten shekels for the female. 8‘But if the person is too poor to pay your valuation, then he shall be placed before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to the ability of the one who vowed, the priest shall value him.

9‘Now if it is an animal of the kind which men can present as an offering to the LORD, any such that one gives to the LORD shall be holy. 10‘He shall not replace it or exchange it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good; but if he does exchange an animal for an animal, then both the original offering and its substitute shall be holy. 11‘If it is any unclean animal of the kind which men do not present as an offering to the LORD, then he shall bring the animal before the priest, 12and the priest shall value it as either good or bad; it shall be as you, the priest, value it. 13‘But if he ever wishes to redeem it, then he shall add one-fifth of it to your valuation.

14‘If a man consecrates his house as sacred to the LORD, the priest shall appraise it as either good or bad; as the priest appraises it, so shall it stand. 15‘If the one who consecrates his house should wish to redeem it, then he shall add one-fifth of your valuation price to it, so that it may be his.

16‘And if a man consecrates to the LORD part of a field of his own property, then your valuation shall be proportionate to the seed needed for it; a homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver. 17‘If he consecrates his field during the Year of Jubilee, it shall stand according to your valuation. 18‘But if he consecrates his field after the Jubilee, then the priest shall calculate the price for him in proportion to the years that remain until the Year of Jubilee; and it shall be deducted from your valuation. 19‘If the one who consecrates the field should ever wish to redeem it, then he shall add one-fifth of the appraisal price to it, so that it may return to him. 20‘If he does not redeem the field, but has sold it to another man, it may no longer be redeemed. 21‘When the field reverts in the Jubilee, the field shall be holy to the LORD, like a field set apart (devoted); the priest shall possess it as his property. 22‘Or if a man consecrates to the LORD a field which he has bought, which is not part of the field of his [ancestral] property, 23then the priest shall calculate for him the amount of your valuation up to the Year of Jubilee; and the man shall give that [amount] on that day as a holy thing to the LORD. 24‘In the Year of Jubilee the field shall return to the one from whom it was purchased, to whom the land belonged [as his ancestral inheritance]. 25‘Every valuation of yours shall be in accordance with the sanctuary shekel; twenty gerahs shall make a shekel.

26‘However, the firstborn among animals, which as a firstborn belongs to the LORD, no man may consecrate, whether an ox or a sheep. It is [already] the LORD’S. 27‘If it is among the unclean animals, the owner may redeem it in accordance with your valuation, and add one-fifth to it; or if it is not redeemed, then it shall be sold in accordance with your valuation.

28‘But nothing that a man sets apart [that is, devotes as an offering] to the LORD out of all that he has, of man or of animal or of the fields of his own property, shall be sold or redeemed. Anything devoted to destruction (banned, cursed) is most holy to the LORD. 29‘No one who may have been set apart among men shall be ransomed [from death], he shall most certainly be put to death.

30‘And all the tithe (tenth part) of the land, whether the seed of the land or the fruit of the tree, is the LORD’S; it is holy to the LORD. 31‘If a man wishes to redeem any part of his tithe, he shall add one-fifth to it. 32‘For every tithe of the herd or flock, whatever passes under the [shepherd’s] staff, the tenth one shall be holy to the LORD. 33‘The man is not to be concerned whether the animal is good or bad, nor shall he exchange it. But if he does exchange it, then both it and its substitute shall become holy; it shall not be redeemed.’”

34These are the commandments which the LORD commanded Moses on Mount Sinai for the children of Israel.

Numbers 1
The Census Of Israel’s Warriors

1The LORD spoke [by special revelation] to Moses in the Wilderness of Sinai in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) on the first day of the second month in the second year after the Israelites came out of the land of Egypt, saying, 2“Take a census of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, every male, head by head 3from twenty years old and upward, all in Israel who are able to go out to war. You and Aaron shall number them, army by army. 4And with you there shall be a man [to assist you] from each tribe, each being the head of his father’s household. 5These then are the names of the men who shall stand with you: from [the tribe of] Reuben, Elizur the son of Shedeur; 6from [the tribe of] Simeon, Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai; 7from [the tribe of] Judah, Nahshon the son of Amminadab; 8from [the tribe of] Issachar, Nethanel the son of Zuar; 9from [the tribe of] Zebulun, Eliab the son of Helon; 10from the sons (descendants) of Joseph: from [the tribe of] Ephraim, Elishama the son of Ammihud; from [the tribe of] Manasseh, Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur; 11from [the tribe of] Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gideoni; 12from [the tribe of] Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai; 13from [the tribe of] Asher, Pagiel the son of Ochran; 14from [the tribe of] Gad, Eliasaph the son of Deuel; 15from [the tribe of] Naphtali, Ahira the son of Enan. 16“These men were the ones called from the congregation, the leaders of their fathers’ (ancestors’) tribes; they were the heads of thousands [the highest ranking officers] in Israel.”

17So Moses and Aaron took these men who were designated by name, 18and assembled all the congregation on the first day of the second month, and they registered by ancestry in their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names from twenty years old and upward, head by head, 19just as the LORD had commanded Moses. So he numbered them in the Wilderness of Sinai.

20The sons of Reuben, Israel’s (Jacob’s) firstborn, their generations, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, head by head, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 21those of the tribe of Reuben numbered 46,500.

22Of the sons of Simeon, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, their numbered men according to the number of names, head by head, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 23those of the tribe of Simeon numbered 59,300.

24Of the sons of Gad, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 25those of the tribe of Gad numbered 45,650.

26Of the sons of Judah, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 27those of the tribe of Judah numbered 74,600.

28Of the sons of Issachar, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 29those of the tribe of Issachar numbered 54,400.

30Of the sons of Zebulun, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 31those of the tribe of Zebulun numbered 57,400.

32Of the sons of Joseph: the sons (descendants) of Ephraim, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 33those of the tribe of Ephraim numbered 40,500.

34Of the sons of Manasseh, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 35those of the tribe of Manasseh numbered 32,200.

36Of the sons of Benjamin, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 37those of the tribe of Benjamin numbered 35,400.

38Of the sons of Dan, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 39those of the tribe of Dan numbered 62,700.

40Of the sons of Asher, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 41those of the tribe of Asher numbered 41,500.

42Of the sons of Naphtali, their descendants, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, according to the number of names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war: 43those of the tribe of Naphtali numbered 53,400.

44These were the ones who were numbered, whom Moses and Aaron numbered, with the leaders of Israel, twelve men, each representing his fathers’ household. 45So all those numbered of the sons of Israel, by their fathers’ households, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go to war in Israel, 46all who were numbered were 603,550.

Levites Exempted 47The Levites, however, were not numbered among them by their fathers’ tribe. 48For the LORD had said to Moses, 49“Only the tribe of Levi you shall not number, nor shall you take their census among the sons of Israel [since they are unavailable to go to war]. 50But appoint the Levites over the tabernacle (sanctuary) of the Testimony, and over all its furnishings and all things that belong to it. They shall carry the tabernacle [when traveling] and all its furnishings, and they shall take care of it and camp around it. 51When the tabernacle is to go forward, the Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle is to [be set up for] camp, the Levites shall set it up. But the layman (non-Levite) who approaches the tabernacle shall be put to death. 52The Israelites shall camp according to their armies, every man by his own camp and every man by his own [tribal] standard (banner). 53“But the Levites shall camp around the tabernacle of the Testimony, so that there will be no wrath against the congregation of the Israelites. The Levites shall be in charge of the tabernacle of the Testimony.” 54Thus the sons of Israel did these things; according to all that the LORD had commanded Moses, so they did.

Numbers 2
Arrangement Of The Camps

1The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 2“The sons of Israel shall camp, each by his own standard, with the banners of their fathers’ households; they shall camp around the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), but at a distance. 3Those who camp on the east side toward the sunrise shall be of the standard of the camp of Judah, by their armies; and Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall lead the sons of Judah, 4and his army as numbered totaled 74,600. 5Next to Judah [on the east side] the tribe of Issachar shall encamp; and Nethanel the son of Zuar shall lead the sons of Issachar, 6and his army as numbered totaled 54,400. 7Then [also on the east side] the tribe of Zebulun; and Eliab the son of Helon shall lead the sons of Zebulun, 8and his army as numbered totaled 57,400. 9The total of the numbered men [in the three tribes on the east side] in the camp of Judah was 186,400, by their armies. They shall move out first [on the march].

10“On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben, by their armies; and Elizur the son of Shedeur shall lead the sons of Reuben, 11and his army as numbered totaled 46,500. 12Those who camp next to Reuben [on the south side] shall be the tribe of Simeon; and Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai shall lead the sons of Simeon, 13and his army as numbered totaled 59,300. 14Then [completing the south side] the tribe of Gad; and Eliasaph the son of Reuel (Deuel) shall lead the sons of Gad, 15and his army as numbered totaled 45,650. 16The total of the numbered men [in the three tribes on the south side] in the camp of Reuben was 151,450, by their armies. They shall move out second [on the march].

17“Then the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) shall move out with the camp of the Levites in the middle of the [other] camps; just as they camp so shall they move out, every man in his place by their standards.

18“On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim, by their armies; and Elishama the son of Ammihud shall lead the sons of Ephraim, 19and his army as numbered totaled 40,500. 20Beside Ephraim [on the west side] shall be the tribe of Manasseh; and Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur shall lead the sons of Manasseh, 21and his army as numbered totaled 32,200. 22Then [completing the west side shall be] the tribe of Benjamin; and Abidan the son of Gideoni shall lead the sons of Benjamin, 23and his army as numbered totaled 35,400. 24The total of the numbered men [of the three tribes on the west side] in the camp of Ephraim was 108,100, by their armies. They shall move out in third place.

25“On the north side shall be the standard of the camp of Dan, by their armies; and Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai shall lead the sons of Dan, 26and his army as numbered totaled 62,700. 27Encamped next to Dan [on the north side] shall be the tribe of Asher; and Pagiel the son of Ochran shall lead the sons of Asher, 28and his army as numbered totaled 41,500. 29Then [completing the north side] comes the tribe of Naphtali; and Ahira the son of Enan shall lead the sons of Naphtali, 30and his army as numbered totaled 53,400. 31“The total of the numbered men [of the three tribes on the north side] in the camp of Dan was 157,600. They shall move out last, standard after standard.”

32These are the men of the Israelites [twenty years old and upward] as numbered by their fathers’ households. The total of the numbered men of the camps by their armies, 603,550. 33But the Levites were not numbered with the [other] Israelites, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. 34Thus the Israelites did [as ordered]; according to everything the LORD had commanded Moses, so they camped by their standards, and so they moved out, everyone with his family (clan), according to his fathers’ household.

Numbers 3
Levites To Be Priesthood

1Now these are the records of the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day when the LORD spoke [by special revelation] with Moses on Mount Sinai. 2These are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the firstborn, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 3These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests who were anointed, whom Aaron consecrated and ordained to minister in the priest’s office. 4But Nadab and Abihu died in the presence of the LORD when they offered strange (unholy, unacceptable, inappropriate) fire before the LORD in the Wilderness of Sinai; and they had no sons. So Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests in the presence and under the supervision of Aaron their father.

5Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 6“Bring the tribe of Levi near and present them before Aaron the priest, so that they may serve him. 7They shall carry out the duties for him and for the whole congregation before the Tent of Meeting, doing the service of the tabernacle. 8They shall also take care of all the furnishings and utensils of the Tent of Meeting, and [attend to] the duties of the Israelites, doing the service of the tabernacle. 9You shall give the Levites to Aaron and to his sons [as servants and helpers]; they are to be given wholly to him from among the Israelites. 10“So you shall appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall observe and attend to their priesthood; but the layman (non-Levite) who approaches [the holy things] shall be put to death.”

11Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 12“Behold, I have taken the Levites from among the sons of Israel instead of and as a substitute for every firstborn, that is, the first that opens the womb among the Israelites. So the Levites shall be Mine, 13for all the firstborn are Mine. On the day that I killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I consecrated for Myself all the firstborn in Israel, both man and animal. They shall be mine; I am the LORD.”

14Then the LORD spoke to Moses in the Wilderness of Sinai, saying, 15“Number the sons of Levi by their fathers’ households, by their families (clans). You shall number every male from a month old and upward.” 16So Moses numbered them just as he was commanded by the word (mouth) of the LORD. 17These are the [three] sons of Levi by their names: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 18These are the names of the [two] sons of Gershon by their families: Libni and Shimei; 19and the [four] sons of Kohath by their families: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel; 20and the [two] sons of Merari by their families: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites by their fathers’ households.

21Of Gershon were the families of the Libnites and of the Shimeites. These are the families of the Gershonites. 22The males who were numbered, every male from a month old and upward totaled 7,500. 23The families of the Gershonites were to camp behind the tabernacle on the west, 24and the leader of the fathers’ households of the Gershonites was Eliasaph the son of Lael. Duties of the Levites 25Now the responsibilities of the sons of Gershon in the Tent of Meeting involved the tabernacle and the tent, its covering, and the curtain for the doorway of the Tent of Meeting, 26and the hangings of the courtyard, the curtain for the doorway of the courtyard which is around the tabernacle and the altar, its tent ropes, and all the service concerning them.

27Of Kohath were the families of the Amramites, the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites; these are the families of the Kohathites. 28The males who were numbered, every male from a month old and upward totaled 8,600, attending to the duties of the sanctuary. 29The families of the sons of Kohath were to camp on the south side of the tabernacle, 30and the leader of the fathers’ households of the families of the Kohathites was Elizaphan the son of Uzziel. 31Now their responsibilities involved the ark, the table [on which the bread of the Presence was placed], the lampstand, the altars, the utensils of the sanctuary with which the priests minister, and the curtain, and all the service concerning them. 32Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, was chief of the leaders of the Levites; he supervised those who performed the duties of the sanctuary.

33Of Merari were the families of the Mahlites and the Mushites; these are the families of Merari. 34The males who were numbered, every male from a month old and upward totaled 6,200. 35The leader of the fathers’ households of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail. The Merarites were to camp on the north side of the tabernacle. 36Now the appointed responsibilities of the sons of Merari involved the frames of the tabernacle, its bars, its pillars, its sockets or bases, and all the equipment, and all the service concerning them, 37and the pillars around the courtyard with their bases and their pegs and their cords (tent ropes).

38Now those to camp before the tabernacle toward the east, before the Tent of Meeting, toward the sunrise, were to be Moses, and Aaron and his sons, performing the duties of the sanctuary for whatever was required of the Israelites; and the layman (non-Levite) who approached [the sanctuary] was to be put to death. 39All the men of the Levites whom Moses and Aaron numbered at the command of the LORD, by their families, every male from a month old and upward, were 22,000.

Firstborn Redeemed 40Then the LORD said to Moses, “Number every firstborn male of the Israelites from a month old and upward, and make a list of their names. 41“You shall take the Levites for Me instead of and as a substitute for all the firstborn among the Israelites. I am the LORD; and you shall take the cattle of the Levites instead of and as a substitute for all the firstborn among the cattle of the Israelites.” 42So Moses numbered all the firstborn among the Israelites, just as the LORD had commanded him; 43and all the firstborn males from a month old and upward as numbered were 22,273 [273 more than the Levites].

44Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 45“Take the Levites [for Me] instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle. And the Levites shall be Mine. I am the LORD. 46For the ransom (redemption price) of the 273 of the firstborn of the Israelites who outnumber the Levites, 47you shall take five shekels apiece, per head, you shall take them in terms of the sanctuary shekel (the shekel is twenty gerahs), 48and give the money, the ransom (redemption price) of those who outnumber the Levites to Aaron and to his sons.” 49So Moses took the ransom (redemption) money from those who were in excess, beyond those ransomed by the Levites; 50from the firstborn of the Israelites he took the money in terms of the sanctuary shekel, 1,365 shekels. 51Then Moses gave the ransom money to Aaron and to his sons at the command of the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

Numbers 4
Duties Of The Kohathites

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 2“Take a census of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, 3from thirty years old and upward, even to fifty years old, all who enter the service to do the work in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 4This is the work and responsibility of the sons of Kohath in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle): the most holy things.

5“When the camp prepares to move out, Aaron and his sons shall come into the sanctuary and take down the veil (curtain) screening off the Holy of Holies, and cover the ark of the testimony with it; 6and they shall put on it a covering of porpoise skin (fine leather), and shall spread over that a cloth of pure blue, and shall insert the carrying poles of the ark. 7Over the table of the bread of the Presence they shall spread a cloth of blue and put on it the plates, the dishes [for incense], the sacrificial bowls, the jars for the drink offering, and the continual bread [of the Presence] shall be on it. 8They shall spread over them a cloth of scarlet, and cover that with a covering of porpoise skin, and they shall insert its carrying poles. 9Then they shall take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand for the light, along with its lamps, its wick cutters, its trays, and all the oil vessels, by which it is supplied; 10and they shall put the lampstand and all its utensils in a covering of porpoise skin, and shall put it on the carrying bars. 11Over the golden [incense] altar they shall spread a blue cloth, and cover it with a covering of porpoise skin, and shall insert its carrying poles; 12and they shall take all the utensils of the service with which they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a blue cloth, and cover them with a covering of porpoise skin, and put them on the carrying bars. 13Then they shall clean away the ashes from the altar [of burnt offering], and spread a purple cloth over it. 14They shall also put on it all its utensils with which they minister in connection with it: the pans, the meat-forks, the shovels, the basins, and all the utensils of the altar; and they shall spread a covering of porpoise skin over it, and insert its carrying poles. 15When Aaron and his sons have finished covering the sanctuary and all its furniture, as the camp sets out, after all that [is done, but not before], the sons of Kohath shall come to carry them [using the poles], so that they do not touch the holy things, and die. These are the things in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) which the sons of Kohath are to carry.

16“The responsibility of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, is the oil for the light, the fragrant incense, the continual grain offering, and the anointing oil—the responsibility of all the tabernacle and everything that is in it, with the sanctuary and its furnishings.”

17Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 18“Do not cut off (eliminate, destroy) the tribe of the families of the Kohathites [who are only Levites and not priests], from among the Levites [by exposing them to the sin of touching the most holy things]. 19But deal with them in this way, so that they may live and not die when they approach the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in and assign each of them to his [specific] work and to his load [to be carried on the march]. 20“But the Kohathites shall not go in to see the holy things, even for an instant, or they will die.”

Duties of the Gershonites 21Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 22“Take a census of the sons of Gershon also, by their fathers’ households, by their families. 23From thirty years and upward to fifty years old, you shall number them; all who enter for service to do the work in the Tent of Meeting. 24This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, in serving and in carrying [when on the march]: 25they shall carry the tent curtains of the tabernacle, and the Tent of Meeting, its covering and the covering of porpoise skin (fine leather) that is on top of it, and the curtain for the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), 26and the hangings of the courtyard, and the curtain for the entrance of the gate of the courtyard which is around the tabernacle and the altar, and their tent ropes, and all the equipment for their service; and all that is to be done, they shall perform. 27Aaron and his sons shall direct all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, all they have to carry and all they have to do. You shall assign to them as a duty all that they are to carry [on the march]. 28This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle); and their duties shall be under the direction of Ithamar the son of Aaron, the [high] priest.

Duties of the Merarites 29“As for the sons of Merari, you shall number them by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households; 30from thirty years and upward to fifty years old, you shall number them, everyone who enters the service to do the work of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 31This is what they are assigned to carry [on the march], according to all their service in the Tent of Meeting: the boards [for the framework] of the tabernacle and its bars and its pillars and its sockets or bases, 32and the pillars around the courtyard with their sockets or bases and their pegs and their cords (tent ropes), with all their equipment and with all their [accessories for] service; and you shall assign each man by name the items he is to carry [on the march]. 33“This is the work of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their tasks in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), under the direction of Ithamar the son of Aaron, the priest.”

34So Moses and Aaron and the leaders of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites by their families (clans) and by their fathers’ households, 35from thirty years and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who enters the service to do the work in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle); 36the men who were numbered by their families were 2,750. 37These were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all who did service in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of the LORD through Moses.

38The men who were numbered of the sons of Gershon, by their families (clans), and by their fathers’ households, 39from thirty years and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service to do the work in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle); 40the men who were numbered by their families, by their fathers’ households, were 2,630. 41These were numbered men of the families of the sons of Gershon, everyone who served in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), whom Moses and Aaron numbered just as the LORD had commanded.

42The men who were numbered of the sons of Merari, by their families (clans), by their fathers’ households, 43from thirty years and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who entered the service for work in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle); 44the men who were numbered by their families were 3,200. 45These are the men who were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered in accordance with the commandment of the LORD through Moses.

46All the men who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the leaders of Israel counted by their families (clans) and by their fathers’ households, 47from thirty years and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who could enter to do the work of service and the work of carrying in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle); 48the men that were numbered were 8,580. 49According to the commandment of the LORD through Moses, they were numbered, each assigned to his work of serving and carrying. Thus they were numbered by him, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

Numbers 5
On Defilement

1The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Command the Israelites to send away from the camp every leper and everyone who has a discharge, and whoever is defiled [that is, ceremonially unclean] by [coming in contact with] the dead. 3“You shall send away both male and female; you shall send them outside the camp so that they will not defile their camp where I dwell in their midst.” 4The Israelites did so, and sent them outside the camp; just as the LORD had said to Moses, so the Israelites did.

5And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 6“Say to the Israelites, ‘When a man or woman commits any of the sins of mankind [against other people], thus breaking faith with the LORD, and that person is guilty, 7then he shall confess the sin which he has committed, and he shall make restitution for his wrong in full, and add a fifth to it, and give it to [the person] whom he has wronged. 8‘But if the man [who was wronged] has no redeemer (relative) to whom the restitution may be made, it is to be given to the LORD for the priest, besides the ram of atonement with which atonement is made for the offender. 9‘Also every contribution pertaining to all the holy gifts of the Israelites which they offer to the priest, shall be his. 10‘And every man’s holy gifts shall be the priest’s; whatever any man gives the priest, it becomes his.’”

The Adultery Test 11Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 12“Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘If any man’s wife goes astray (deviates) and is unfaithful to him, 13and a man is intimate with her, and it is hidden from the eyes of her husband and it is kept secret, although she has defiled herself, and there is no witness against her and she has not been caught in the act, 14and if a spirit (sense, attitude) of jealousy comes over him and he is jealous and angry at his wife who has defiled herself—or if a spirit of jealousy comes over him and he is jealous of his wife when she has not defiled herself— 15then the man shall bring his wife to the priest, and he shall bring as an offering for her, a tenth of an ephah of barley meal; he shall not pour oil on it nor put frankincense on it [the symbols of favor and joy], because it is a grain offering of jealousy, a memorial grain offering, a reminder of [the consequences of] wickedness.

16‘Then the priest shall have her approach and have her stand before the LORD, 17and the priest shall take holy water [from the sacred basin] in an earthenware vessel; and he shall take some of the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle and put it in the water. 18‘The priest shall then have the woman stand before the LORD, and let the hair of the woman’s head hang loose, and put the memorial grain offering in her hands, which is the jealousy offering, and in the hand of the priest is to be the water of bitterness that brings a curse. 19‘Then the priest shall have her take an oath and say to the woman, If no man has lain with you and if you have not gone astray into uncleanness [while married], then be immune to this water of bitterness that brings a curse; 20but if you have gone astray [while married] and you have defiled yourself and a man other than your husband has been intimate with you” 21(then the priest shall have the woman swear the oath of the curse, and say to the woman), “The LORD make you a curse and an oath among your people when the LORD makes your thigh waste away and your abdomen swell; 22and this water that brings a curse shall go into your stomach, and make your abdomen swell and your thigh waste away.” And the woman shall say, “Amen. Amen (so let it be).”

23‘The priest shall then write these curses on a scroll and shall wash them off into the water of bitterness; 24and he shall make the woman drink the water of bitterness that brings a curse, and the water that brings the curse will go into her and cause bitterness. 25‘Then the priest shall take the grain offering of jealousy out of the woman’s hand, and he shall wave the grain offering before the LORD and offer it on the altar. 26‘Then the priest shall take a handful of the grain offering as the memorial portion of it and offer it up in smoke on the altar, and afterward he shall make the woman drink the water. 27‘When he has made her drink the water, then it shall come about, that if she has defiled herself and has been unfaithful to her husband, the curse water will go into her and cause bitterness and cause her abdomen to swell and her thigh to waste away, and the woman will become a curse among her people. 28‘But if the woman has not defiled herself and is clean, then she will be free and conceive children.

29‘This is the law of jealousy: when a wife goes astray [while married] and defiles herself, 30or when a spirit (sense, attitude) of jealousy and suspicion comes on a man and he is jealous of his wife; then he shall have the woman stand before the LORD, and the priest shall apply this law to her. 31‘Further, the husband will be free from guilt, but that woman [if guilty] shall bear her guilt.’”

Numbers 6
Law Of The Nazirites

1Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Say to the sons of Israel, ‘When a man or a woman makes a special vow, the vow of a Nazirite, that is, one separated and dedicated to the LORD, 3he shall abstain from wine and strong drink; he shall drink no vinegar, whether made from wine or strong drink, nor shall he drink any grape juice nor eat fresh or dried grapes. 4‘All the time of his separation he shall not eat anything produced from the grapevine, from the seeds even to the skins.

5‘All the time of the vow of his separation no razor shall be used on his head. Until the time of his separation to the LORD is completed, he shall be holy, and shall let the hair of his head grow long.

6‘All the time that he separates himself to the LORD he shall not go near a dead body. 7‘He shall not make himself [ceremonially] unclean for his father, mother, brother, or sister, when they die, because [the responsibility for] his separation to God is on his head. 8‘All the time of his separation he is holy to the LORD.

9‘If a man dies very suddenly beside him, and he defiles his dedicated head, then he shall shave his head on the day that he becomes [ceremonially] clean; he shall shave it on the seventh day [the end of the purification period]. 10‘On the eighth day he shall bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest, to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 11‘The priest shall offer the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering and make atonement for him concerning his sin because of the [dead] body. He shall consecrate his head the same day, 12and he shall dedicate himself to the LORD for the time of his separation and shall bring a male lamb a year old as a guilt offering; but the previous days will be void and lost, because his separation was defiled.

13‘Now this is the law of the Nazirite when the days of his separation and dedication are fulfilled: he shall bring the offering to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 14and he shall offer his gift to the LORD: one male lamb a year old without blemish as a burnt offering, and one female lamb a year old without blemish as a sin offering, and one ram without blemish as a peace offering, 15and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mixed with oil, and wafers of unleavened bread spread with oil, along with their grain offering and their drink offering. 16‘Then the priest shall present them before the LORD and shall offer the person’s sin offering and his burnt offering. 17‘He shall also offer the ram as a sacrifice of peace offerings to the LORD, together with the basket of unleavened bread; the priest shall offer also its grain offering and its drink offering. 18‘The Nazirite shall shave his dedicated head at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), and take the dedicated hair of his head and put it on the fire which is under the sacrifice of the peace offerings. 19‘The priest shall take the boiled shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened [ring-shaped] loaf out of the basket, and one unleavened flat cake and shall put them on the hands of the Nazirite after he has shaved his dedicated hair. 20‘Then the priest shall wave them as a wave offering before the LORD; they are a holy portion for the priest, together with the breast that is waved and the thigh that is offered by lifting up; and afterward the Nazirite may drink wine.’

21“This is the law for the Nazirite who vows his offering to the LORD for his separation, besides what else he is able to afford, according to the vow which he has vowed; so shall he do according to the law for his separation and abstinence [as a Nazirite].”

Aaron’s Benediction 22Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 23“Speak to Aaron and his sons, saying, ‘This is the way you shall bless the Israelites. Say to them:
24The LORD bless you, and keep you [protect you, sustain you, and guard you];
25The LORD make His face shine upon you [with favor],
And be gracious to you [surrounding you with lovingkindness];
26The LORD lift up His countenance (face) upon you [with divine approval],
And give you peace [a tranquil heart and life].’

27“So Aaron and his sons shall put My name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them.”

Numbers 7
Offerings Of The Leaders

1On the day that Moses had finished setting up the tabernacle and had anointed and consecrated it and all its furniture, and the altar and all its utensils; he also anointed them and consecrated them [for holy use]. 2Then the leaders of Israel, the heads of their fathers’ households, made offerings. (These were the leaders of the tribes; they were the ones who were over the men who were numbered.) 3They brought their offering before the LORD, six covered carts and twelve oxen; a cart for each two of the leaders and an ox for each one; and they presented them before the tabernacle. 4Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 5“Accept these things from them, so that they may be used in the service of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), and give them to the Levites, to each man according to his service.” 6So Moses took the carts and the oxen and gave them to the Levites. 7He gave two carts and four oxen to the sons of Gershon, according to their service [in transporting the tabernacle]; 8and he gave four carts and eight oxen to the sons of Merari, according to their service [in transporting the tabernacle], under the supervision of Ithamar the son of Aaron, the [high] priest. 9But to the sons of Kohath he gave nothing, because they were assigned the care of the holy things which they carried on their shoulders [when the tabernacle was moved].

10The leaders offered the dedication sacrifices for the altar on the day that it was anointed; and they offered their sacrifice before the altar. 11Then the LORD said to Moses, “Let them present their offerings, one leader each day, for the dedication of the altar.”

12Now the one who presented his offering on the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah; 13and his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 14one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 15one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 16one male goat as a sin offering; 17and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab [from the tribe of Judah].

18On the second day Nethanel the son of Zuar, leader [of the tribe] of Issachar, presented [his offering]; 19he presented as his offering one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 20one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 21one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 22one male goat as a sin offering; 23and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Nethanel the son of Zuar [from the tribe of Issachar].

24On the third day [it was] Eliab the son of Helon, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Zebulun [who presented his offering]; 25his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 26one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 27one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 28one male goat as a sin offering; 29and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon [from the tribe of Zebulun].

30On the fourth day [it was] Elizur the son of Shedeur, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Reuben [who presented his offering]; 31his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering; 32one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 33one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 34one male goat as a sin offering; 35and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur [from the tribe of Reuben].

36On the fifth day [it was] Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Simeon [who presented his offering]; 37his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 38one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 39one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, for a burnt offering; 40one male goat as a sin offering; 41and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai [from the tribe of Simeon].

42On the sixth day [it was] Eliasaph the son of Deuel, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Gad [who presented his offering]; 43his offering was one silver dish the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and a silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 44one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 45one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 46one male goat as a sin offering; 47and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel [from the tribe of Gad].

48On the seventh day [it was] Elishama the son of Ammihud, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Ephraim [who presented his offering]; 49his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 50one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 51one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 52one male goat as a sin offering; 53and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud [from the tribe of Ephraim].

54On the eighth day [it was] Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Manasseh [who presented his offering]; 55his offering was one silver dish the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 56one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 57one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 58one male goat as a sin offering; 59and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur [from the tribe of Manasseh].

60On the ninth day [it was] Abidan the son of Gideoni, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Benjamin [who presented his offering]; 61his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 62one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 63one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 64one male goat as a sin offering; 65and as the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni [from the tribe of Benjamin].

66On the tenth day [it was] Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Dan [who presented his offering]; 67his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 68one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 69one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 70one male goat as a sin offering; 71and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai [from the tribe of Dan].

72On the eleventh day [it was] Pagiel the son of Ochran, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Asher [who presented his offering]; 73his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 74one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 75one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 76one male goat as a sin offering; 77and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ochran [from the tribe of Asher].

78On the twelfth day [it was] Ahira the son of Enan, leader [of the tribe] of the sons of Naphtali [who presented his offering]; 79his offering was one silver dish, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver basin of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering; 80one golden bowl of ten shekels, full of incense; 81one young bull, one ram, one male lamb one year old, as a burnt offering; 82one male goat as a sin offering; 83and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs one year old. This was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan [from the tribe of Naphtali].

84This was the dedication offering for the altar from the leaders of Israel on the day when it was anointed: twelve dishes of silver, twelve silver basins, twelve golden bowls; 85each dish of silver weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, each basin seventy [shekels]; all the silver vessels weighed 2,400 shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary; 86the twelve golden bowls, full of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, all the gold of the bowls being a hundred and twenty shekels; 87all the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bulls, the rams twelve, the male lambs one year old twelve, together with their grain offering; and the male goats as a sin offering twelve; 88and all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were twenty-four bulls, the rams sixty, the male goats sixty, the male lambs one year old sixty. This was the dedication for the altar [of burnt offering] after it was anointed.

89Now when Moses went into the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) to speak with the LORD, he heard the voice speaking to him from above the mercy seat (the gold cover) that was on the ark of the Testimony from between the two cherubim; and He spoke [by special revelation] to him.

Numbers 8
The Seven Lamps

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to Aaron and say to him, ‘When you set up and light the lamps, the seven lamps will shine in front of the lampstand.’” 3And Aaron did so; he set up the lamps at the front of the lampstand, just as the LORD had commanded Moses. 4Now this was the workmanship of the lampstand: hammered work of gold; from its base to its flowers it was hammered work; according to the pattern which the LORD had shown Moses, so he made the lampstand.

Cleansing the Levites 5Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 6“Take the Levites from among the sons of Israel and cleanse them. 7This is what you shall do to them to [ceremonially] cleanse them: sprinkle the water of purification on them, and let them use a razor over their whole body and wash their clothes, and they will be clean. 8Then let them take a young bull and its grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, and you shall take another young bull as a sin offering. 9You shall present the Levites before the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), and you shall also assemble the whole congregation of the children of Israel, 10and present the Levites before the LORD, and the Israelites shall lay their hands on the Levites. 11Aaron shall present the Levites before the LORD as a wave offering from the Israelites, so that they may perform the service of the LORD. 12Then the Levites shall lay their hands on the heads of the bulls, then you are to offer the one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to the LORD, to make atonement for the Levites. 13You shall have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons and present them as a wave offering to the LORD.

14“Thus you shall separate the Levites from among the Israelites, and the Levites shall be Mine [in a very special sense]. 15Then after that the Levites may go in to serve the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), but you shall cleanse them [first] and present them as a wave offering; 16for they are wholly given to Me from among the Israelites. I have taken them for Myself instead of all who are born first, the firstborn of all the Israelites. 17For all the firstborn among the Israelites are Mine, among the men and among the animals; on the day that I struck down every firstborn in the land of Egypt, I sanctified and set the Israelites apart for Myself. 18And I have taken the Levites instead of every firstborn among the Israelites. 19“I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the Israelites, to perform the service of the Israelites at the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) and to make atonement for them, so that there will be no plague among the Israelites if they should approach the sanctuary.”

20Thus Moses and Aaron and all the congregation of the children of Israel did [these things] to the Levites; in accordance with all that the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so the Israelites did to them. 21The Levites, too, purified themselves from sin and they washed their clothes; and Aaron presented them as a wave offering before the LORD, and Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse them. 22Then after that the Levites went in to perform their service in the Tent of Meeting before Aaron and his sons; just as the LORD had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they did to them.

Retirement 23Now the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 24“This is what applies to the Levites: from twenty-five years old and upward they shall enter to perform service in the work of the Tent of Meeting, 25but at the age of fifty years, they shall retire from the service of the [tabernacle] work and serve no longer. 26They may assist their brothers in the Tent of Meeting to keep an obligation, but they shall do no [heavy or difficult] work. Thus you shall deal with the Levites concerning their obligations.”

Numbers 9
The Passover

1The LORD spoke to Moses in the Wilderness of Sinai in the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying, 2“The sons of Israel are to keep the Passover at its appointed time. 3“On the fourteenth day of this month at twilight, you shall keep it at its appointed time; according to all its statutes and ordinances you shall keep it.” 4So Moses told the Israelites to observe the Passover. 5They observed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month at twilight in the Wilderness of Sinai; in accordance with all that the LORD had commanded Moses, so the Israelites did. 6But there were certain men who were [ceremonially] unclean because of [touching] the dead body of a man, so they could not observe the Passover on that day; so they came before Moses and Aaron that same day. 7Those men said to Moses, “We are [ceremonially] unclean because of [touching] a dead body. Why are we being restrained from presenting the LORD’S offering at its appointed time among the Israelites?” 8Therefore, Moses said to them, “Wait, and I will listen to what the LORD will command concerning you.”

9Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 10“Say to the Israelites, ‘If any one of you or of your descendants becomes [ceremonially] unclean because of [touching] a dead body or is on a distant journey, he may, however, observe the Passover to the LORD. 11‘On the fourteenth day of the second month [thirty days later] at twilight, they shall observe it; they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs. 12‘They shall leave none of it until morning nor break any of its bones; in accordance with all the statutes of the Passover they shall observe it. 13‘But the man who is [ceremonially] clean and is not on a journey, and yet does not observe the Passover, that person shall be cut off from among his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them] because he did not bring the LORD’S offering at its appointed time; that man will bear [the penalty of] his sin. 14‘If a stranger lives among you as a resident alien and observes the Passover to the LORD, in accordance with its statutes and its ordinances, so shall he do; you shall have one statute, both for the resident alien and for the native of the land.’”

The Cloud on the Tabernacle 15Now on the day that the tabernacle was erected, the cloud [of God’s presence] covered the tabernacle, that is, the tent of the Testimony; and in the evening it was over the tabernacle, appearing like [a pillar of] fire until the morning. 16So it was continuously; the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire by night. 17Whenever the cloud was lifted from over the tent (tabernacle), afterward the Israelites would set out; and in the place where the cloud stopped, there the Israelites would camp. 18At the LORD’S command the Israelites would journey on, and at His command they would camp. As long as the cloud remained over the tabernacle they remained camped. 19Even when the cloud lingered over the tabernacle for many days, the Israelites would keep their obligation to the LORD and not set out. 20Sometimes the cloud remained only a few days over the tabernacle, and in accordance with the command of the LORD they remained camped. Then at His command they set out. 21If sometimes the cloud remained [over the tabernacle] from evening only until morning, when the cloud was lifted in the morning, they would journey on; whether in the daytime or at night, whenever the cloud was lifted, they would set out. 22Whether it was two days or a month or a year that the cloud [of the LORD’S presence] lingered over the tabernacle, staying above it, the Israelites remained camped and did not set out; but when it was lifted, they set out. 23At the command of the LORD they camped, and at the command of the LORD they journeyed on; they kept their obligation to the LORD, in accordance with the command of the LORD through Moses.

Numbers 10
The Silver Trumpets

1The LORD spoke further to Moses, saying, 2“Make two trumpets of silver; you shall make them of hammered work. You shall use them to summon the congregation and to have the camps move out. 3When both are blown, all the congregation [that is, all adult males] shall gather before you at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 4However, if a single trumpet is blown, then the leaders, heads of the tribes of Israel, shall gather themselves to you. 5When you blow an alarm, the camps on the east side [of the tabernacle] shall set out. 6When you blow an alarm the second time, then the camps on the south side [of the tabernacle] shall set out. They shall blow an alarm whenever they are to move out [on their journeys]. 7When the assembly is to be gathered, you shall blow [the trumpets in short, sharp tones], but without sounding an alarm. 8The sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow the trumpets; and the trumpets shall be for you a perpetual statute throughout your generations. 9When you go to war in your land against the enemy that attacks you, then sound an alarm with the trumpets, so that you may be remembered before the LORD your God, and you shall be saved from your enemies. 10“Also in the day of rejoicing, and in your appointed feasts, and at the beginnings of your months, you shall sound the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifice of your peace offerings; and they shall be as a reminder of you before your God. I am the LORD your God.”

The Tribes Leave Sinai 11On the twentieth day of the second month in the second year [since leaving Egypt], the cloud [of the Lord’s presence] was lifted from over the tabernacle of the Testimony, 12and the Israelites set out on their journey from the Wilderness of Sinai, and the cloud [of the LORD’S guiding presence] settled down in the Wilderness of Paran. 13So they moved out for the first time in accordance with the command of the LORD through Moses. 14The standard of the camp of the sons of Judah, according to their armies, moved out first, Nahshon the son of Amminadab was [commander] over its army, 15and Nethanel the son of Zuar was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Issachar; 16and Eliab the son of Helon was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Zebulun.

17Then the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who were carrying the tabernacle, moved out. 18Next the standard of the camp of the sons of Reuben, according to their armies, moved out, with Elizur the son of Shedeur [commander] over its army, 19and Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Simeon, 20and Eliasaph the son of Deuel was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Gad.

21Then the Kohathites moved out, carrying the holy things, and the tabernacle was set up before they arrived. 22Next the standard of the camp of the sons of Ephraim moved out, according to their armies, with Elishama the son of Ammihud [commander] over its army, 23and Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Manasseh, 24and Abidan the son of Gideoni was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Benjamin.

25Then the standard of the camp of the sons of Dan, according to their armies, which formed the rear guard for all the camps, moved out, with Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai [commander] over its army, 26and Pagiel the son of Ochran was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Asher, 27and Ahira the son of Enan was [commander] over the tribal army of the sons of Naphtali. 28This was the order of march of the sons of Israel by their armies as they moved out.

29Then Moses said to Hobab the son of Reuel the Midianite, Moses’ father-in-law, “We are going to the place of which the LORD said, ‘I will give it to you.’ Come with us, and we will be good to you, for the LORD has promised good [things] concerning Israel.” 30But Hobab [Moses’ brother-in-law] said to him, “I will not go; I will return to my own land and to my family.” 31Then Moses said, “Please do not leave us, for you know how we are to camp in the wilderness, and you will serve as eyes for us [as we make our trek through the desert]. 32“So if you will go with us, it shall be that whatever good the LORD does for us, we will do the same for you.”

33So they set out from the mountain of the LORD (Sinai) three days’ journey; and the ark of the covenant of the LORD went in front of them during the three days’ journey to seek out a resting place for them. 34The cloud of the LORD was over them by day when they set out from the camp.

35Whenever the ark set out, Moses said,
“Rise up, O LORD!
Let Your enemies be scattered;
And let those who hate You flee before You.”

36And when the ark rested, Moses said,
“Return, O LORD,
To the myriad (many) thousands of Israel.”

Numbers 11
The People Complain

1Now the people became like those who complain and whine about their hardships, and the LORD heard it; and when the LORD heard it, His anger was kindled, and the fire of the LORD burned among them and devoured those in the outlying parts of the camp. 2So the people cried out to Moses, and when Moses prayed to the LORD, the fire died out. 3He named that place Taberah (the place of burning), because the fire of the LORD burned among them.

4The rabble among them [who followed Israel from Egypt] had greedy desires [for familiar and delicious food], and the Israelites wept again and said, “Who will give us meat to eat? 5We remember the fish we ate freely and without cost in Egypt, the cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions, and garlic. 6“But now our appetite is gone; there is nothing at all [in the way of food] to be seen but this manna.”

7The manna was like coriander seed, and it looked like bdellium. 8The people went about and gathered it, and ground it in mills or beat it in mortars, and boiled it in pots, and made cakes with it; and it tasted like cakes baked with fresh [olive] oil. 9When the dew fell on the camp at night, the manna fell with it.

The Complaint of Moses 10Now Moses heard the people weeping [in self-pity] throughout their families, every man at the doorway of his tent; and the anger of the LORD blazed hotly, and Moses regarded their behavior as evil. 11So Moses said to the LORD, “Why have You been so hard on Your servant? And why have I not found favor in Your sight, that You have placed the burden of all these people on me? 12Was it I who conceived all these people? Was it I who brought them forth, that You should say to me, ‘Carry them in your arms as a nurse carries the nursing infant, to the land which You swore to their fathers’? 13Where am I to get meat to give to all these people? For they weep before me and say, ‘Give us meat, so that we may eat.’ 14I am not able to carry all these people alone, because the burden is too heavy for me. 15“So if this is the way You are going to deal with me, please kill me at once, if I have found favor in your sight, and do not let me see my wretchedness.”

Seventy Elders to Assist 16Accordingly, the LORD said to Moses, “Gather for Me seventy men from among the elders of Israel whom you know to be the elders of the people and their officers; bring them to the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) and let them stand there with you. 17Then I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take away some of the Spirit who is upon you, and will put Him upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with you, so that you will not have to bear it all alone. 18“Say to the people, ‘Consecrate (separate as holy) yourselves for tomorrow, and you shall eat meat; for you have wept [in self-pity] in the ears of the LORD, saying, “Who will give us meat to eat? For we were well-off in Egypt.” Therefore the LORD will give you meat, and you shall eat. 19‘You shall eat, not one day, nor two days, nor five days, nor ten days, nor twenty days, 20but a whole month—until it comes out of your nostrils and is disgusting to you—because you have rejected and despised the LORD who is among you, and have wept [in self-pity] before Him, saying, “Why did we come out of Egypt?”’” 21But Moses said, “The people, among whom I am, are 600,000 [fighting men] on foot [besides all the women and children]; yet You have said, ‘I will give them meat, so that they may eat it for a whole month!’ 22“Should flocks and herds be slaughtered for them, to be sufficient for them? Or should all the fish of the sea be collected for them to be sufficient for them?” 23The LORD said to Moses, “Is the LORD’S hand (ability, power) limited (short, inadequate)? You shall see now whether My word will come to pass for you or not.”

24So Moses went out and spoke to the people the words of the LORD, and he gathered seventy men from among the elders of the people and stationed them around the Tent (tabernacle). 25Then the LORD came down in the cloud and spoke to him; and He took some of the Spirit who was upon Moses and put Him upon the seventy elders. When the Spirit rested upon them, they prophesied [praising God and declaring His will], but they did not do it again.

26But two men had remained in the camp; one named Eldad and the other named Medad. The Spirit rested upon them (now they were among those who had been registered, but had not gone out to the Tent), and they prophesied in the camp. 27So a young man ran and told Moses and said, “Eldad and Medad are prophesying [extolling the praises of God and declaring His will] in the camp.” 28Then Joshua the son of Nun, the attendant of Moses from his youth, said, “My lord Moses, stop them!” 29But Moses said to him, “Are you jealous for my sake? Would that all the LORD’S people were prophets and that the LORD would put His Spirit upon them!” 30Then Moses went back into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.

The Quail and the Plague 31Now there went forth a wind from the LORD and it brought quails from the sea, and let them fall [so they flew low] beside the camp, about a day’s journey on this side and on the other side, all around the camp, about two cubits (three feet) deep on the surface of the ground. 32The people spent all that day and all night and all the next day and caught and gathered the quail (the one who gathered least gathered ten homers) and they spread them out for themselves around the camp [to cure them by drying]. 33While the meat was still between their teeth, before it was chewed, the anger of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the LORD struck them with a very severe plague. 34So that place was named Kibroth-hattaavah (the graves of greediness), because there they buried the people who had been greedy [for more than the manna that God provided them]. 35From Kibroth-hattaavah the people set out for Hazeroth, and they remained at Hazeroth.

Numbers 12
The Murmuring Of Miriam And Aaron

1Now Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman whom he had married (for he had married a Cushite woman); 2and they said, “Has the LORD really spoken only through Moses? Has He not spoken also through us?” And the LORD heard it. 3(Now the man Moses was very humble (gentle, kind, devoid of self-righteousness), more than any man who was on the face of the earth.) 4Suddenly the LORD said to Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, “Come out, you three, to the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle).” And the three of them came out. 5The LORD came down in a pillar of cloud and stood at the doorway of the tabernacle, and He called Aaron and Miriam, and they came forward. 6And He said,
“Hear now My words:
If there is a prophet among you,
I the LORD will make Myself known to him in a vision
And I will speak to him in a dream.
7“But it is not so with My servant Moses;
He is entrusted and faithful in all My house.
8“With him I speak mouth to mouth [directly],
Clearly and openly and not in riddles;
And he beholds the form of the LORD.
Why then were you not afraid to speak against My servant Moses?”

9And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Miriam and Aaron, and He departed. 10But when the cloud had withdrawn from over the tent, behold, Miriam was leprous, as white as snow. And Aaron turned and looked at Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous. 11Then Aaron said to Moses, “Oh, my lord, I plead with you, do not account this sin to us, in which we have acted foolishly and in which we have sinned. 12“Oh, do not let her be like one dead, already half decomposed when he comes from his mother’s womb.” 13So Moses cried out to the LORD, saying, “Heal her please, O God, I plead with You!” 14But the LORD said to Moses, “If her father had but spit in her face, would she not bear her shame for seven days? Let her be shut up outside the camp for seven days, and afterward she may return.” 15So Miriam was shut up outside the camp for seven days, and the people did not move on until Miriam was brought in again [and declared ceremonially clean from her leprosy].

16Afterward the people moved on from Hazeroth and camped in the Wilderness of Paran.

Numbers 13
Spies View The Land

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Send men to spy out the land of Canaan, which I am going to give to the sons of Israel. From each of their fathers’ tribes you shall send a man, every one a leader among them.” 3So Moses sent spies from the Wilderness of Paran at the command of the LORD, all of them men who were heads of the Israelites. 4These were their names: from the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur; 5from the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori; 6from the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh; 7from the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph; 8from the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea [that is, Joshua] the son of Nun; 9from the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu; 10from the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi; 11from the tribe of Joseph, that is, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi; 12from the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli; 13from the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael; 14from the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi; 15from the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi. 16These are the names of the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land; but Moses called Hoshea the son of Nun, Joshua (the LORD is salvation).

17Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said to them, “Go up this way into the Negev (the South country); then go up into the hill country. 18See what the land is like and whether the people who live there are strong or weak, few or many, 19and whether the land in which they live is good or bad, and whether the cities in which they live are [open] camps or fortifications, 20and what the land is, whether it is fat (productive) or lean, whether there is timber on it or not. Make an effort to get some of the fruit of the land.” Now the time was the time of the first ripe grapes.

21So they went up and spied out the land from the Wilderness of Zin to Rehob [a town in Lebanon], at Lebo-hamath [in the far north]. 22When they had gone up into the Negev (the South country), they came to Hebron; and Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai the descendants of Anak were there. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)

23Then they came to the Valley of Eshcol (cluster of grapes), and from there cut down a branch with a single cluster of grapes; and they carried it on a pole between two of them, with some of pomegranates and the figs. 24That place was called the Valley of Eshcol (cluster of grapes) because of the cluster of grapes which the sons of Israel cut down there.

The Spies’ Reports 25When they returned from spying out the land, at the end of forty days, 26they came to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation of the sons of Israel in the Wilderness of Paran at Kadesh, and brought back word to them and to all the congregation, and showed them the land’s fruit. 27They reported to Moses and said, “We went in to the land where you sent us; and it certainly does flow with milk and honey, and this is its fruit. 28But the people who live in the land are strong, and the cities are fortified (walled) and very large; moreover, we saw there the descendants of Anak [people of great stature and courage]. 29“[The people descended from] Amalek live in the land of the Negev (South country); the Hittite, the Jebusite, and the Amorite live in the hill country; and the Canaanites live by the [Dead] Sea and along the side of the Jordan.”

30Then Caleb quieted the people before Moses, and said, “Let us go up at once and take possession of it; for we will certainly conquer it.” 31But the men who had gone up with him said, “We are not able to go up against the people [of Canaan], for they are too strong for us.” 32So they gave the Israelites a bad report about the land which they had spied out, saying, “The land through which we went, in spying it out, is a land that devours its inhabitants. And all the people that we saw in it are men of great stature. 33“There we saw the Nephilim (the sons of Anak are part of the Nephilim); and we were like grasshoppers in our own sight, and so we were in their sight.”

Numbers 14
The People Rebel

1Then all the congregation [of Israel] raised their voices and cried out, and the people wept that night. 2All the Israelites murmured [in discontent] against Moses and Aaron; and the whole congregation said to them, “Oh that we had died in the land of Egypt! Or that we had died in this wilderness! 3“Why is the LORD bringing us to this land [of Canaan], to fall by the sword? Our wives and children will become plunder. Would it not be better for us to return to Egypt?” 4So they said one to another, “Let us appoint a [new] leader and return to Egypt.”

5Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the Israelites. 6Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, who were among those who had spied out the land, tore their clothes [as a sign of grief], 7and they spoke to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying, “The land through which we passed as spies is an exceedingly good land. 8If the LORD delights in us, then He will bring us into this land and give it to us, a land which flows with milk and honey. 9“Only do not rebel against the LORD; and do not fear the people of the land, for they will be our prey. Their protection has been removed from them, and the LORD is with us. Do not fear them.” 10But all the congregation said to stone Joshua and Caleb with stones. But the glory and brilliance of the LORD appeared at the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) before all the sons of Israel.

Moses Pleads for the People 11The LORD said to Moses, “How long will these people treat me disrespectfully and reject Me? And how long will they not believe in Me, despite all the [miraculous] signs which I have performed among them? 12“I will strike them with the pestilence (plague) and dispossess them, and will make you into a nation greater and mightier than they.”

13But Moses said to the LORD, “Then the Egyptians will hear of it, for by Your strength You brought up these people from among them, 14and they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land. They have heard that You, LORD, are among these people [of Israel], that You, LORD, are seen face to face, while Your cloud stands over them; and that You go before them in a pillar of cloud by day and in a pillar of fire by night. 15Now if You kill these people as one man, then the nations (Gentiles) that have heard of Your fame will say, 16‘Because the LORD was not able to bring these people into the land which He promised to give them, therefore He slaughtered them in the wilderness.’ 17But now, please, let the power of the Lord be great, just as You have declared, saying, 18‘The LORD is slow to anger, and abundant in lovingkindness, forgiving wickedness and transgression; but He will by no means clear the guilty, visiting (avenging) the wickedness and guilt of the fathers on the children, to the third and fourth generations [that is, calling the children to account for the sins of their fathers].’ 19“Please pardon the wickedness and guilt of these people according to the greatness of Your lovingkindness, just as You have forgiven these people, from Egypt even until now.”

The LORD Pardons and Rebukes 20So the LORD said, “I have pardoned them according to your word; 21but indeed as I live, all the earth will be filled with the glory of the LORD. 22Surely all the men who have seen My glory and My [miraculous] signs which I performed in Egypt and in the wilderness, yet have put Me to the test these ten times and have not listened to My voice, 23will by no means see the land which I swore to [give to] their fathers; nor will any who treated me disrespectfully and rejected Me see it. 24But My servant Caleb, because he has a different spirit and has followed Me fully, I will bring into the land into which he entered, and his descendants shall take possession of it. 25“Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites live in the valley; tomorrow turn and set out for the wilderness by way of the Red Sea.”

26The LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 27“How long shall I put up with this evil congregation who murmur [in discontent] against Me? I have heard the complaints of the Israelites, which they are making against Me. 28Say to them, ‘As I live,’ says the LORD, ‘just what you have spoken in My hearing I will most certainly do to you; 29your dead bodies will fall in this wilderness, even all who were numbered of you, your entire number from twenty years old and upward, who have murmured against Me. 30‘Except for Caleb the son of Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun, not one of you shall enter the land in which I swore [an oath] to settle you. 31‘But your children whom you said would become plunder, I will bring in, and they will know the land which you have despised and rejected. 32‘But as for you, your dead bodies will fall in this wilderness. 33‘Your sons shall be wanderers and shepherds in the wilderness for forty years, and they will suffer for your unfaithfulness (spiritual infidelity), until your corpses are consumed in the wilderness. 34‘According to the number of days in which you spied out the land [of Canaan], forty days, for each day, you shall bear and suffer a year for your sins and guilt, for forty years, and you shall know My displeasure [the revoking of My promise and My estrangement because of your sin]. 35‘I, the LORD, have spoken. I will most certainly do this to all this evil congregation who are gathered together against Me. In this wilderness they shall be consumed [by war, disease, and plagues], and here they shall die.’”

36As for the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land, and who returned and made all the congregation murmur and complain against him by bringing back a bad report concerning the land, 37even those [ten] men who brought back the very bad report of the land died by a plague before the LORD. 38But Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh remained alive out of those men who went to spy out the land.

Israel Repulsed 39Moses spoke the Lord’s words to all the Israelites, and the people mourned greatly. 40They got up early in the morning and went up to the ridge of the hill country, saying, “Look, here we are; we have indeed sinned, but we will go up to the place which the LORD has promised.” 41But Moses said, “Why then are you transgressing the commandment of the LORD, when it will not succeed? 42Do not go up, or you will be struck down before your enemies, for the LORD is not among you. 43“For the Amalekites and the Canaanites will be there in front of you, and you will fall by the sword, because you have turned away from following the LORD; therefore the LORD will not be with you.” 44But [in their arrogance] they dared to go up to the ridge of the hill country; however, neither the ark of the covenant of the LORD nor Moses left the camp. 45Then the Amalekites and the Canaanites who lived in that hill country came down and struck the Israelites and scattered them as far as Hormah.

Numbers 15
Laws For Canaan

1Now the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘When you come into the land where you are to live, which I am giving you, 3then make an offering by fire to the LORD, a burnt offering or a sacrifice to fulfill a special vow, or as a freewill offering or in your appointed feasts, to make a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD, from the herd or from the flock. 4‘The one who presents his offering shall present to the LORD a grain offering of a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a fourth of a hin of oil, 5and you shall prepare wine for the drink offering, a fourth of a hin, with the burnt offering or for the sacrifice, for each lamb. 6‘Or for a ram you shall prepare as a grain offering two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of oil. 7‘And for the drink offering you shall offer a third of a hin of wine, as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 8‘When you prepare a bull as a burnt offering or as a sacrifice, in fulfilling a special vow or peace offering to the LORD, 9then you shall offer with the bull a grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with half a hin of oil; 10and you shall bring as the drink offering one-half a hin of wine as an offering by fire, as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD.

11‘Thus shall it be done for each bull, or for each ram, or for each of the male lambs, or of the goats. 12‘According to the number that you prepare, so shall you do to everyone according to their number. 13‘All who are native-born shall do these things in this way, in presenting an offering by fire, as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. Law of the Stranger 14‘If a stranger lives as a resident alien with you, or whoever may be among you throughout your generations, and he wishes to make an offering by fire, as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD, just as you do, so shall he do. 15‘As for the assembly, there shall be one [and the same] statute for you [of the congregation] and for the stranger who is a resident alien with you, a permanent statute throughout your generations; as you are, so shall the stranger be before the LORD. 16‘There is to be one law and one ordinance for you and for the stranger who lives with you as a resident alien.’”

17Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 18“Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘When you enter the land to which I am bringing you, 19then, when you eat the food of the land, you shall lift up an offering (heave offering) to the LORD. 20‘You shall lift up a cake made of the first of your [ground grain which has been made into] dough as an offering [to the Lord]; as an offering from the threshing floor, so shall you lift it up. 21‘From the first of your dough (ground grain) you shall give to the LORD an offering throughout your generations.

22‘But when you unintentionally fail and do not observe all these commandments, which the LORD has spoken to Moses, 23even all that the LORD has commanded you through Moses, from the day that the LORD gave commandments and onward throughout your generations, 24then it shall be, if it was done unintentionally without the knowledge of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young bull as a burnt offering, as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD, with its grain offering and its drink offering, according to the ordinance, and one male goat as a sin offering. 25‘Then the priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the sons of Israel, and they will be forgiven, for it was an error and they have brought their offering, an offering by fire to the LORD, and their sin offering before the LORD, for their error. 26‘So all the congregation of the Israelites will be forgiven as well as the stranger who lives among them as a resident alien, because all the people were involved in the error.

27‘Also if one person sins unintentionally, then he shall offer a female goat one year old as a sin offering. 28‘The priest shall make atonement before the LORD for the person who commits an error when he sins unintentionally, making atonement for him so that he may be forgiven. 29‘You shall have one law for him who sins unintentionally, whether he is native-born among the Israelites or a stranger who is living among them as a resident alien. 30‘But the person who does [anything wrong] willfully and defiantly, whether he is native-born or a stranger, that one is blaspheming the LORD, and that person shall be cut off from among his people [excluding him from the atonement made for them]. 31‘Because he has despised and rejected the word of the LORD, and has broken His commandment, that person shall be utterly cut off; [the responsibility for] his wickedness and guilt will be upon him.’”

Sabbath-breaking Punished 32Now while the Israelites were in the wilderness, they found a man who was gathering wood on the Sabbath day. 33Those who found him gathering wood brought him to Moses and Aaron and to all the congregation; 34and they put him in custody, because it had not been explained [by God] what should be done to him. 35Then the LORD said to Moses, “The man shall certainly be put to death. All the congregation shall stone him with stones outside the camp.” 36So all the congregation brought him outside the camp and stoned him to death with stones, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

37The LORD said to Moses, 38“Speak to the sons of Israel and tell them to make for themselves tassels on the hems of their garments throughout their generations, and put a cord of blue on the tassel of each hem. 39It shall be a tassel for you to look at and remember all the commandments of the LORD, to do them, so that you do not follow after [the desires of] your own heart and eyes, [desires] after which you used to follow and play the prostitute, 40so that you may remember to do all My commandments and be holy (set apart) to your God. 41“I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the LORD your God.”

Numbers 16
Korah’s Rebellion

1Now Korah the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram the sons of Eliab, and On the son of Peleth, descendants of Reuben, took action, 2and they rose up [in rebellion] before Moses, together with some of the Israelites, two hundred and fifty leaders of the congregation chosen in the assembly, men of distinction. 3They assembled together against Moses and Aaron, and said to them, “You have gone far enough, for all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them. Why then do you exalt yourselves above the assembly of the LORD?”

4And when Moses heard this, he fell face downward; 5and he spoke to Korah and all his company, saying, “In the morning the LORD will show who belongs to Him, and who is holy, and will bring him near to Himself; the one whom He will choose He will bring near to Himself. 6Do this: Take censers for yourselves, Korah and all your company, 7then put fire in them and place incense on them in the presence of the LORD tomorrow; and the man whom the LORD chooses shall be the one who is holy. You have gone far enough, you sons of Levi.”

8Then Moses said to Korah, “Hear now, you sons of Levi, 9does it seem but a small thing to you that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to Himself, to do the service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to stand before the congregation to minister to them; 10and that He has brought you near [to Him], Korah and all your brothers, sons of Levi with you? Would you seek the priesthood also? 11“Therefore you and all your company are gathered together against the LORD; but as for Aaron, who is he that you murmur against him?”

12Then Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab; but they said [defiantly], “We will not come up. 13Is it a small thing that you have brought us up out of a land [of plenty] flowing with milk and honey to kill us in the wilderness, but you would also lord it over us? 14“Indeed, you have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us an inheritance of fields and vineyards. Will you gouge out the eyes of these men? We will not come up!”

15Then Moses became very angry and said to the LORD, “Pay no attention to their offering! I have not taken one donkey from them, nor have I harmed any one of them.” 16Moses said to Korah, “You and all your company are to appear before the LORD tomorrow, both you and they along with Aaron. 17“Each of you take his censer and put incense on it, and each of you bring his censer before the LORD, two hundred and fifty censers; also you and Aaron shall each bring his censer.” 18So they each took his own censer and put fire on it and laid incense on it; and they stood at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), with Moses and Aaron. 19Then Korah assembled all the congregation against Moses and Aaron at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). And the glory and brilliance of the LORD appeared to all the congregation.

20Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 21“Separate yourselves from among this congregation, so that I may consume them immediately.” 22But they fell on their faces [before the LORD], and said, “O God, God of the spirits of all flesh! When one man sins, will You be angry with the entire congregation?”

23Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 24“Say to the congregation, ‘Get away from around the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.’”

25Then Moses arose and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel followed him. 26And he said to the congregation, “Get away from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, or you will be swept away in all their sin.” 27So they got back from around the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram; and Dathan and Abiram came out and stood at the doorway of their tents with their wives and their sons and their little children. 28Then Moses said, “By this you shall know that the LORD has sent me to do all these works; for I do not act of my own accord. 29If these men die the common death of all mankind or if what happens to everyone happens to them, then [you will know for sure that] the LORD has not sent me. 30“But if the LORD creates an entirely new thing, and the ground opens its mouth and swallows them up, along with all that belongs to them, and they descend alive into Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead), then you will understand that these men have spurned and rejected the LORD!”

31As soon as Moses finished speaking all these words, the ground under them split open; 32and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them and their households, and all the men who supported Korah, with all their possessions. 33So they and all that belonged to them went down alive to Sheol; and the earth closed over them, and they perished from among the assembly. 34All Israel who were around them fled at their outcry, for they said, “The earth may swallow us also.” 35Fire also came forth from the LORD and consumed the two hundred and fifty men who were offering the incense.

36Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 37“Tell Eleazar the son of Aaron, the priest, that he is to pick up the censers from the midst of the blaze for they are holy; and you scatter the burning coals abroad. 38“As for the censers of these people who have sinned at the cost of their lives, have the censers made into hammered sheets as a plating for the altar [of burnt offering], for they were presented before the LORD and they are sacred. They shall be a [warning] sign to the sons of Israel.” 39So Eleazar the priest took the bronze censers which the Levites who were burned had offered, and they were hammered out [into broad sheets] as a plating for the [bronze] altar [of burnt offering], 40as a reminder to the sons of Israel so that no layman—that is, one who is not of the descendants of Aaron should approach to offer incense before the LORD; so that he will not become like Korah and as his company—just as the LORD had said to him through Moses.

Murmuring and Plague 41But on the next day the entire congregation of the Israelites murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, “You have caused the death of the people of the LORD.” 42When the congregation was assembled against Moses and Aaron, they turned and looked at the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), and behold, the cloud covered it and the glory and brilliance of the LORD appeared. 43Then Moses and Aaron came to the front of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), 44and the LORD spoke to Moses saying, 45“Get away from among this congregation, so that I may consume them immediately.” Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces [in silence before the LORD]. 46Moses said to Aaron, “Take a censer and put fire in it from the altar and lay incense on it; then bring it quickly to the congregation and make atonement for them, for wrath has gone forth from the LORD; the plague has begun!” 47So Aaron took the burning censer as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the assembly; and behold, the plague had [already] begun among the people; and he put on the incense and made atonement for the people. 48He stood between the dead and the living, so that the plague was brought to an end. 49But those who died in the plague were 14,700, besides those who died because of Korah. 50Then Aaron returned to Moses at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), for the plague had been brought to an end.

Numbers 17
Aaron’s Rod Buds

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Speak to the sons of Israel and get rods from them, a rod for each father’s household, from all their leaders according to their fathers’ households, twelve rods. Write every man’s name on his rod, 3and write Aaron’s name on the rod of Levi [his ancestor]; for there is one rod for the head of each of their fathers’ households. 4You shall then deposit them in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) in front of [the ark of] the Testimony, where I meet with you. 5“It shall be that the rod of the man whom I choose will bud, and I will no longer hear the constant grumblings of the Israelites, who are grumbling against you.” 6So Moses spoke to the Israelites, and each of their leaders gave him a rod, one for each leader according to their fathers’ households, twelve rods, and the rod of Aaron was among their rods. 7So Moses deposited the rods before the LORD in the Tent of the Testimony (tabernacle).

8Now on the next day Moses went into the Tent of the Testimony, and the rod of Aaron of the tribe of Levi had sprouted and put out buds and produced blossoms and yielded [ripe] almonds. 9Moses brought out all the rods from the presence of LORD to all the Israelites; and they looked, and each man took his rod. 10But the LORD said to Moses, “Put Aaron’s rod back before the Testimony [in the ark], to be kept as a [warning] sign for the rebellious and contentious, so that you may put an end to their murmurings [of discontent] against Me, so that they do not die.” 11And Moses did so; just as the LORD had commanded him, so he did.

12The sons of Israel said to Moses, “Look, we perish, we are doomed, all doomed! 13“Everyone who approaches, who approaches the tabernacle of the LORD, must die. Are we to perish completely?”

Numbers 18
Duties Of Levites

1So the LORD said to Aaron, “You and your sons and your father’s household (family) with you shall bear the guilt in connection with the sanctuary [that is, through your service as priests you will atone for the offenses which the people unknowingly commit when brought into contact with the manifestations of God’s presence]; and you and your sons with you shall bear the guilt in connection with your priesthood [that is, your own unintentional offenses]. 2But bring with you also your brothers, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of your father (ancestor), so that they may join with you and serve you [as assistants], while you and your sons with you are before the Tent of the Testimony [the Holy Place where only priests may go, and the Most Holy Place which only the high priest may enter]. 3And the Levites shall attend to your duty [as assistants] and to the duties of all the tent (tabernacle); only they shall not approach the articles of the sanctuary and the altar, or both they and you will die. 4They shall join you and attend to the duties of the Tent of Meeting—all the service of the tent—and no stranger [no layman, anyone who is not a Levite] may approach you [and your sons]. 5So you shall attend to the duties of the sanctuary and the duties of the altar [of burnt offering and the altar of incense], so that there will no longer be wrath on the Israelites [as with Korah, Dathan, and Abiram]. 6Behold, I Myself have taken your fellow Levites from among the sons of Israel; they are a gift to you, given (dedicated) to the LORD, to do the service for the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 7“Therefore you and your sons with you shall attend to your priesthood for everything concerning the altar [of burnt offering and the altar of incense] and [of the Holy of Holies] within the veil, and you are to serve. I am giving you the priesthood as a bestowed service, but the stranger (outsider, layman) who approaches shall be put to death.”

The Priests’ Portion 8Then the LORD spoke to Aaron, “Now behold, I [the LORD] have entrusted you with My heave offerings, even all the holy gifts of the Israelites, I have given them to you as a portion, and to your sons as a continual allotment. 9This shall be yours of the most holy things, [reserved] from the fire: every offering of the people, every grain offering and sin offering and guilt offering, which they shall render (give) to Me, shall be most holy for you and for your sons. 10You shall eat it as the most holy thing; every male [of your family] shall eat it. It shall be holy to you. 11This also is yours: the heave offering of their gift, including all the wave offerings of the Israelites. I have given them to you and to your sons and to your daughters with you as a continual allotment; everyone in your household who is [ceremonially] clean may eat it. 12All the best of the fresh [olive] oil, and all the best of the new wine and of the grain, the first fruits of those which they give to the LORD, I give them to you. 13The first ripe fruits of all that is in the land, which they bring to the LORD, shall be yours; everyone in your household who is [ceremonially] clean may eat it. 14Every devoted thing in Israel [everything that has been promised to the Lord with an oath] shall be yours. 15Every firstborn of the womb of all flesh, whether it is man or animal, which they bring to the LORD, shall be yours; nevertheless, the firstborn of man you shall most certainly redeem, and the firstborn of unclean animals you shall redeem. 16And their redemption price, from a month old you shall redeem, according to your valuation, for the [fixed] price of five shekels in silver, in accordance with the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs. 17But the firstborn of a cow or of a sheep or of a goat you shall not redeem; they are holy [and belong to the LORD]. You shall sprinkle their blood on the altar and shall offer up their fat in smoke as an offering by fire, for a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD. 18Their meat shall be yours, like the breast of a wave offering and like the right thigh. 19“All the offerings of the holy things, which the Israelites offer to the LORD I have given to you and to your sons and your daughters with you as a continual allotment. It is an everlasting covenant of salt [that cannot be dissolved or violated] before the LORD to you and to your descendants with you.” 20Then the LORD said to Aaron, “You shall have no inheritance in the land [of the Israelites], nor have any portion [of land] among them. I am your portion and your inheritance among the children of Israel.

21“Behold, I have given the Levites all the tithe in Israel as an inheritance, in return for their service which they perform, the service of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 22The Israelites shall never again approach the Tent of Meeting [the covered sanctuary, the Holy Place, and the Holy of Holies], or they [who do] will incur sin and die. 23Only the Levites shall perform the service of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), and they shall bear their iniquity; it shall be a statute forever throughout your generations, that the Levites shall have no inheritance [of land] among the children of Israel. 24“But the tithe of the Israelites, which they present as an offering to the LORD, I have given to the Levites as an inheritance; therefore I have said to them, ‘They shall have no inheritance among the children of Israel.’”

25Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 26“Moreover, you shall speak to the Levites and say to them, ‘When you take from the Israelites the tithe which I have given to you from them as your inheritance, then you shall present an offering from it to the LORD, a tithe of the tithe [paid by the people]. 27‘Your offering shall be credited to you as the grain from the threshing floor or as the full produce from the wine vat. 28‘Likewise you shall also present an offering to the LORD from all your tithes, which you receive from the Israelites; and from it you shall give the LORD’S offering to Aaron the priest. 29‘Out of all your gifts, you shall present every offering due to the LORD, from all the best of it, even the sacred part from them.’ 30Therefore you shall say to them, ‘When you have offered the best from it, then the rest shall be credited to the Levites as the product of the threshing floor, and as the product of the wine vat. 31‘You may eat it anywhere, you and [the members of] your households, for it is your compensation in return for your service in the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 32‘You will bear no sin because of it when you have offered the best of it; but you shall not profane the sacred gifts of the children of Israel, or you will die [because of it].’”

Numbers 19
Ordinance Of The Red Heifer

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying, 2“This is the statute of the law which the LORD has commanded: ‘Tell the Israelites to bring you an unblemished red heifer in which there is no defect and on which a yoke has never been placed. 3‘You shall give it to Eleazar the priest, and it shall be brought outside the camp and be slaughtered in his presence. 4‘Next Eleazar the priest shall take some of its blood with his finger and sprinkle some of it toward the front of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) seven times. 5‘Then the heifer shall be burned in his sight; its skin, its flesh, its blood, and its waste, shall be burned (reduced to ash). 6‘The priest shall take cedar wood and hyssop and scarlet [material] and cast them into the midst of the burning heifer. 7‘Then the priest shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water; and afterward come into the camp, but he shall be [ceremonially] unclean until evening. 8‘The one who burns the heifer shall wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and shall be unclean until evening. 9‘Now a man who is [ceremonially] clean shall collect the ashes of the heifer and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, and the congregation of the Israelites shall keep it for water to remove impurity; it is [to be used for] purification from sin. 10‘The one who gathers the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until evening. This shall be a perpetual statute to the Israelites and to the stranger who lives as a resident alien among them.

11‘The one who touches the dead body of any person shall be unclean for seven days. 12‘That one shall purify himself from uncleanness with the water [made with the ashes of the burned heifer] on the third day and on the seventh day, and then he will be clean; but if he does not purify himself on the third day and on the seventh day, he will not be clean. 13‘Whoever touches a corpse, the body of anyone who has died, and does not purify himself, defiles the tabernacle of the LORD; and that person shall be cut off from Israel [that is, excluded from the atonement made for them]. Because the water for impurity was not sprinkled on him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is still on him.

14‘This is the law when a man dies in a tent: everyone who comes into the tent and everyone who is in the tent shall be [ceremonially] unclean for seven days. 15‘Every open container [in the tent], which has no covering tied down on it, is unclean. 16‘Also, anyone in the open field who touches one who has been killed with a sword or who has died [of natural causes], or a human bone or a grave, shall be unclean for seven days. 17‘Then for the unclean person they shall take some of the ashes of the heifer burnt for the purification from sin, and running water shall be added to them in a container. 18‘A clean person shall take hyssop and dip it in the water and sprinkle it on the tent and on all the furnishings and on the people who were there, and on the one who touched the bone or the one who was killed or the one who died [naturally] or the grave. 19‘Then the clean person shall sprinkle [the water for purification] on the unclean person on the third day and on the seventh day, and on the seventh day the unclean man shall purify himself, and wash his clothes and bathe himself in water, and shall be [ceremonially] clean at evening.

20‘But the man who is unclean and does not purify himself, that person shall be cut off from among the assembly, because he has defiled the sanctuary of the LORD. The water for purification has not been sprinkled on him; he is unclean. 21‘So it shall be a perpetual statute to them. He who sprinkles the water for impurity [on another] shall wash his clothes, and he who touches the water for impurity shall be unclean until evening. 22‘Furthermore, anything the unclean person touches shall be unclean, and anyone who touches it shall be [ceremonially] unclean until evening.’”

Numbers 20
Death Of Miriam

1Then the Israelites, the whole congregation, came into the Wilderness of Zin in the first month [in the fortieth year after leaving Egypt]. And the people lived in Kadesh. Miriam died there and was buried there.

2Now there was no water for the congregation, and they gathered together against Moses and Aaron. 3The people contended with Moses, and said, “If only we had perished when our brothers perished [in the plague] before the LORD! 4Why have you brought up the assembly of the LORD into this wilderness to die here, we and our livestock? 5“Why have you made us come up from Egypt, to bring us to this wretched place? It is not a place of grain or of figs or of vines or of pomegranates, and there is no water to drink.” 6Then Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly to the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) and fell on their faces [before the LORD in prayer]. Then the glory and brilliance of the LORD appeared to them; 7and the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, The Water of Meribah 8“Take the rod; and you and your brother Aaron assemble the congregation and speak to the rock in front of them, so that it will pour out its water. In this way you shall bring water for them out of the rock and let the congregation and their livestock drink [fresh water].”

9So Moses took the rod from before the LORD, just as He had commanded him; 10and Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly before the rock. Moses said to them, “Listen now, you rebels; must we bring you water out of this rock?” 11Then Moses raised his hand [in anger] and with his rod he struck the rock twice [instead of speaking to the rock as the LORD had commanded]. And the water poured out abundantly, and the congregation and their livestock drank [fresh water]. 12But the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “Because you have not believed (trusted) Me, to treat Me as holy in the sight of the sons of Israel, you therefore shall not bring this assembly into the land which I have given them.” 13These are the waters of Meribah (contention, strife), where the sons of Israel contended with the LORD, and He showed Himself holy among them.

14Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom: “Thus says your brother Israel, ‘You know all the hardship that has come upon us [as a nation]; 15that our fathers (ancestors) went down to Egypt, and we lived there for a long time, and the Egyptians treated [both] us and our fathers badly. 16‘But when we cried out to the LORD [for help], He heard us and sent an angel and brought us out of Egypt. Now look, we are in Kadesh, a city on the edge of your territory. 17‘Please let us pass through your land. We will not pass through a field or through a vineyard; we will not even drink water from a well. We will go along the king’s highway, not turning [off-course] to the right or to the left until we have passed through your territory.’”

18But [the king of] Edom said to him, “You shall not pass through my territory, or I will come out against you with the sword.” 19Again, the Israelites said to him, “We will go by the highway [trade route], and if I and my livestock drink any of your water, then I will pay for it. Only let me pass through on foot, nothing else.” 20But the king of Edom said, “You shall not pass through [my territory].” And Edom came out against Israel with many people and a strong hand. 21Thus [the king of] Edom refused to give Israel passage through his territory, so Israel turned away from him.

22Now when they set out from Kadesh, the Israelites, the whole congregation, came to Mount Hor. Death of Aaron 23Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron at Mount Hor, by the border of the land of Edom, saying, 24“Aaron will be gathered to his people [in death]; for he shall not enter the land which I have given to the children of Israel, because you [both] rebelled against My command at the waters of Meribah. 25Take Aaron and Eleazar his son and bring them up to Mount Hor; 26and strip Aaron of his garments and put them on Eleazar his son. So Aaron will be gathered to his fathers, and will die there.” 27So Moses did just as the LORD had commanded; and they went up Mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation. 28After Moses stripped Aaron of his [priestly] garments and put them on Eleazar his son, Aaron died there on the mountain top. Then Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain. 29When all the congregation saw that Aaron had died, all the house of Israel wept (mourned) for him thirty days.

Numbers 21
Arad Conquered

1When the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who lived in the Negev (the South country) heard that Israel was coming by the way of Atharim [the route traveled by the spies sent out by Moses], he fought against Israel and took some of them captive. 2So Israel made a vow to the LORD, and said, “If You will indeed hand over these people to me, then I will utterly destroy their cities.” 3The LORD heard the voice of Israel and handed over the Canaanites; then they utterly destroyed them and their cities. So the name of the place was called Hormah (dedicate to destruction).

4Then they set out from Mount Hor by the way of the [branch of the] Red Sea [called the Gulf of Aqabah], to go around the land of Edom; and the people became impatient, because [of the challenges] of the journey. 5So the people spoke against God and against Moses, “Why have you brought us out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no bread, nor is there any water, and we loathe this miserable food.” The Bronze Serpent 6Then the LORD sent fiery (burning) serpents among the people; and they bit the people, and many Israelites died. 7So the people came to Moses, and said, “We have sinned, for we have spoken against the LORD and against you; pray to the LORD, so that He will remove the serpents from us.” So Moses prayed for the people. 8Then the LORD said to Moses, “Make a fiery serpent [of bronze] and set it on a pole; and everyone who is bitten will live when he looks at it.” 9So Moses made a serpent of bronze and put it on the pole, and it happened that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he looked to the bronze serpent, he lived.

10Now the sons of Israel moved out and camped at Oboth. 11They journeyed on from Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim, in the wilderness facing Moab, toward the sunrise. 12From there they set out and camped in the Wadi Zered. 13From there they journeyed on and camped on the other side of [the river] Arnon, which is in the wilderness that extends from the boundary of the Amorites; for [the river] Arnon is the boundary of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites. 14That is why it is said in the Book of the Wars of the LORD:
“Waheb in Suphah,
And the wadis of the Arnon [River],
15And the slope of the wadis
That stretches toward the site of Ar
And leans to the border of Moab.”

16From there the Israelites went on to Beer, that is the well where the LORD said to Moses, “Gather the people together and I will give them water.”

17Then Israel sang this song,
“Spring up, O well! Sing to it,
18The well which the leaders dug,
Which the nobles of the people hollowed out
With the scepter and with their staffs.”
And from the wilderness Israel journeyed to Mattanah, 19and from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth, 20and from Bamoth to the valley that is in the field of Moab, to the top of Pisgah which looks down on the wasteland.

Two Victories 21Then Israel sent messengers to Sihon, king of the Amorites, saying, 22“Let me pass through your land; we will not turn away [from the road] into field or vineyard; we will not drink the water of the wells. We will go by the king’s highway until we have crossed your border.” 23But Sihon would not allow Israel to pass through his border. Instead Sihon gathered all his people together and went out against Israel into the wilderness, and came to Jahaz, and he fought against Israel. 24Then Israel struck the king of the Amorites with the edge of the sword and took possession of his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, as far as the Ammonites, for the boundary of the Ammonites was strong. 25Israel took all these cities, and settled in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon and in all its towns. 26For Heshbon was the city of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab and had taken all his land out of his hand, as far as the Arnon. 27That is why those who use proverbs say,
“Come to Heshbon,
Let the city of Sihon be built and established.
28“For fire has gone out of Heshbon,
A flame from the city of Sihon;
It devoured Ar of Moab
And the lords of the heights of the Arnon.
29“Woe (judgment is coming) to you, Moab!
You are destroyed, O people of [the god] Chemosh!
Moab has given his sons as fugitives [that is, survivors of battle],
And his daughters into captivity
To Sihon king of the Amorites.
30“We have shot them down [with arrows];
Heshbon is destroyed as far as Dibon,
And we have laid them waste as far as Nophah,
Which reaches to Medeba.”

31Thus Israel settled in the land of the Amorites. 32Now Moses sent men to spy out Jazer, and they overthrew its villages and dispossessed the Amorites who were there.

33Then they turned and went up by the way of Bashan; and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei. 34But the LORD said to Moses, “Do not fear him, for I have handed over him and all his people and his land to you; and you shall do to him just as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon.” 35So the sons of Israel killed Og and his sons and all his people, until there was no survivor left to him; and they took possession of his land.

Numbers 22
Balak Sends For Balaam

1The Israelites journeyed, and camped in the plains of Moab, on the east side of the Jordan [River] across from Jericho.

2And Balak [the king of Moab] the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites. 3So Moab was terrified because of the people, for they were numerous. Moab was overcome with fear because of the sons of Israel. 4Moab said to the elders of Midian, “Now this horde will lick up all that is around us, just as the ox licks up the grass of the field.” And Balak the son of Zippor was the king of Moab at that time. 5So he sent messengers to Balaam [a famous prophet-diviner] the son of Beor at Pethor, which is by the [Euphrates] River, in the land of the descendants of his people, to call for him, saying, “There is a people who have come out of Egypt; behold, they cover the surface of the land, and they are living opposite me. 6“Now please come, curse these people for me, for they are too powerful for me; perhaps I will be able to defeat them and drive them out of the land. For I know [your reputation] that he whom you bless is blessed, and he whom you curse is cursed.”

7So the elders of Moab and of Midian departed with fees for divination (foretelling) in hand; and they came to Balaam and told him the words of Balak. 8Balaam said to them, “Spend the night here and I will bring word back to you as the LORD may speak to me.” So the leaders of Moab stayed with Balaam [that night]. 9God came to Balaam, and said, “Who are these men with you?” 10Balaam said to God, “Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, has sent word to me: 11‘Hear this, the people who came out of Egypt cover the surface of the land; come now, curse them for me. Perhaps I may be able to fight against them and drive them out.’” 12God said to Balaam, “Do not go with them; you shall not curse the people [of Israel], for they are blessed.” 13Balaam got up in the morning, and said to the leaders of Balak, “Go back to your own land [of Moab], for the LORD has refused to let me go with you.” 14The leaders of Moab arose and went to Balak, and said, “Balaam refused to come with us.”

15Then Balak again sent leaders, more numerous and [men who were] more distinguished than the first ones. 16They came to Balaam, and said to him, “Thus says Balak the son of Zippor, ‘I beg you, let nothing hinder you from coming to me. 17‘For I will give you a very great honor and I will do whatever you tell me; so please come, curse these people [of Israel] for me.’” 18Balaam answered the servants of Balak, “Even if Balak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not do anything, either small or great, contrary to the command of the LORD my God. 19“Now please, you also stay here tonight, and I will find out what else the LORD will say to me.” 20God came to Balaam at night and said to him, “If the men have come to call you, get up and go with them, but you shall still do only what I tell you.”

21So Balaam got up in the morning and saddled his donkey and went with the leaders of Moab. The Angel and Balaam 22But God’s anger was kindled because he was going, and the Angel of the LORD took His stand in the way as an adversary against him. Now he was riding on his donkey, and his two servants were with him. 23When the donkey saw the Angel of the LORD standing in the way and His drawn sword in His hand, the donkey turned off the path and went into the field; but Balaam struck the donkey to turn her back toward the path. 24But the Angel of the LORD stood in a narrow path of the vineyards, with a [stone] wall on this side and a [stone] wall on that side. 25When the donkey saw the Angel of the LORD, she pressed herself against the wall and crushed Balaam’s foot against it, and he struck her again. 26The Angel of the LORD went further, and stood in a narrow place where there was no room to turn, either to the right or to the left. 27When the donkey saw the Angel of the LORD, she lay down under Balaam, so Balaam was angry and he struck the donkey [a third time] with his staff. 28And the LORD opened the mouth of the donkey, and she said to Balaam, “What have I done to you that you have struck me these three times?” 29Then Balaam said to the donkey, “Because you have made a mockery of me! If there had been a sword in my hand, I would have killed you by now!” 30The donkey said to Balaam, “Am I not your donkey on which you have ridden all your life until this day? Have I ever been accustomed to do so to you?” And he said, “No.”

31Then the LORD opened Balaam’s eyes, and he saw the Angel of the LORD standing in the way with His drawn sword in His hand; and he bowed his head and lay himself face down. 32The Angel of the LORD said to him, “Why have you struck your donkey these three times? Behold, I have come out to stand against you, because your behavior was obstinate and contrary to Me. 33“The donkey saw Me and turned away from Me these three times. If she had not turned away from Me, I would have certainly killed you now, and let her live.” 34Balaam said to the Angel of the LORD, “I have sinned, for I did not know that You were standing in the way against me. But now, if my going displeases You, I will turn back.” 35The Angel of the LORD said to Balaam, “Go with the men, but you shall speak only what I tell you.” So Balaam went along with the leaders of Balak.

36When Balak heard that Balaam was coming, he went out to meet him at the city of Moab, which is on the border at the Arnon [River], at the farthest end of the border. 37Balak said to Balaam, “Did I not urgently send word to you to call you? Why did you not come to me [immediately]? Am I really unable to honor (pay) you?” 38So Balaam said to Balak, “Indeed I have come to you now, but am I able to say anything at all? The word that God puts in my mouth, that I shall speak.” 39And Balaam went with Balak, and they came to Kiriath-huzoth. 40Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep, and sent some to Balaam and to the leaders who were with him.

41Then it came about in the morning that Balak took Balaam and brought him up to the high places of Baal; from there he saw a portion of the Israelites.

Numbers 23
The Prophecies Of Balaam

1Then Balaam said to Balak, “Build seven altars for me here, and prepare for me seven bulls and seven rams here.” 2Balak did just as Balaam had said, and Balak and Balaam offered a bull and a ram on each altar. 3Then Balaam said to Balak, “Stand beside your burnt offering and I will go. Perhaps the LORD will come to meet me; and whatever He shows me I will tell you.” So he went to a desolate hill.

4Now God met Balaam, who said to Him, “I have prepared seven altars, and I have offered a bull and a ram on each altar.” 5Then the LORD put a speech in Balaam’s mouth, and said, “Return to Balak, and you shall speak thus.” 6Balaam returned to Balak, and behold, he was standing by his burnt sacrifice, he and all the leaders of Moab. 7Balaam took up his [first] discourse (oracle) and said:
“Balak, the king of Moab, has brought me from Aram (Syria),
from the mountains of the east, [saying,]
‘Come, curse [the descendants of] Jacob for me;
And come, [violently] denounce Israel.’
8“How shall I curse those whom God has not cursed?
Or how can I [violently] denounce those the LORD has not denounced?
9“For from the top of the rocks I see Israel,
And from the hills I look at him.
Behold, the people [of Israel] shall dwell alone
And will not be reckoned among the nations.
10“Who can count the dust (the descendants) of Jacob
And the number of even the fourth part of Israel?
Let me die the death of the righteous [those who are upright and in right standing with God],
And let my end be like his!”

11Then Balak said to Balaam, “What have you done to me? I brought you to curse my enemies, but here you have [thoroughly] blessed them instead!” 12Balaam answered, “Must I not be obedient and careful to speak what the LORD has put in my mouth?”

13Balak said to him, “Come with me, I implore you, to another place from where you can see them, although you will see only the nearest and not all of them; and curse them for me from there.” 14So he took Balaam to the field of Zophim to the top of [Mount] Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bull and a ram on each altar. 15Balaam said to Balak, “Stand here beside your burnt offering while I go to meet the LORD over there.” 16Then the LORD met Balaam and put a speech in his mouth, and said, “Go back to Balak and you shall speak thus.” 17When Balaam returned to Balak, he was standing beside his burnt offering, and the leaders of Moab were with him. And Balak said to him, “What has the LORD spoken?” 18Balaam took up his [second] discourse (oracle) and said:
“Rise up, O Balak, and hear;
Listen [closely] to me, son of Zippor.
19“God is not a man, that He should lie,
Nor a son of man, that He should repent.
Has He said, and will He not do it?
Or has He spoken and will He not make it good and fulfill it?
20“Behold, I have received His command to bless [Israel].
He has blessed, and I cannot reverse it.
21“God has not observed wickedness in Jacob [for he is forgiven],
Nor has He seen trouble in Israel.
The LORD their God is with Israel,
And the shout of their King is among the people.
22“God brought them out of Egypt;
They have the strength of a wild ox.
23“For there is no enchantment or omen against Jacob,
Nor is there any divination against Israel.
At the proper time it shall be said to Jacob
And to Israel, what has God done!
24“Behold, a people rises up like a lioness
And lifts itself up like a lion;
He will not lie down until he devours the prey
And drinks the blood of the slain.”

25Then Balak said to Balaam, “Neither curse them at all nor bless them at all!” 26But Balaam answered Balak, “Did I not say to you, ‘All that the LORD speaks, that I must do?’”

27Then Balak said to Balaam, “Please come; I will take you to another place. Perhaps it will please God to let you curse them for me from there.” 28So Balak brought Balaam to the top of [Mount] Peor, that overlooks the wasteland. 29And Balaam said to Balak, “Build seven altars for me here, and prepare for me seven bulls and seven rams here.” 30Balak did just as Balaam had said, and offered a bull and a ram on each altar.

Numbers 24
The Prophecy From Peor

1When Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel, he did not go as he had done each time before [superstitiously] to seek omens and signs [in the natural world], but he set his face toward the wilderness (desert). 2And Balaam raised his eyes and he saw Israel living in their tents tribe by tribe; and the Spirit of God came on him. 3He took up his [third] discourse (oracle) and said:
“The oracle of Balaam the son of Beor,
And the oracle of the man whose eye is opened [at last, to see clearly the purpose and will of God],
4The oracle of one who hears the words of God,
Who sees the vision of the Almighty,
Falling down, but having his eyes open and uncovered,
5How fair are your tents, O Jacob,
And your tabernacles, O Israel!
6“Like valleys that stretch out,
Like gardens beside the river,
Like aloes planted by the LORD,
Like cedars beside the waters.
7“Water [that is, great blessings] will flow from his buckets,
And his offspring will live by many waters,
And his king will be higher than Agag,
And his kingdom shall be exalted.
8“God brought Israel out of Egypt;
Israel has strength like the wild ox;
He will devour [Gentile] nations, his adversaries (enemies),
And will crush their bones in pieces,
And shatter them with his arrows.
9“He bowed down [to rest], he lies down as a lion;
And as a lioness, who dares to rouse him?
Blessed [of God] is he who blesses you,
And cursed [of God] is he who curses you.”

10Then Balak’s anger was kindled against Balaam, and he struck his hands together; and Balak said to Balaam, “I called you to curse my enemies, but behold, you have done nothing but bless them these three times. 11“Therefore now flee to your place! I had intended to honor you greatly, but behold, the LORD has held you back from honor.” 12Balaam said to Balak, “Did I not tell your messengers whom you had sent to me, 13‘Even if Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not go beyond the command of the LORD, to do either good or bad of my own accord. What the LORD speaks, that I will speak?’ 14“And now, look, I am going to my people; come, I will advise you as to what this people [Israel] will do to your people [Moab] in the days to come.”

15He took up his [fourth] discourse (oracle) and said:
“The oracle of Balaam the son of Beor,
The oracle of the man whose eye is opened,
16The oracle of him who hears the words of God
And knows the knowledge of the Most High,
Who sees the vision of the Almighty,
Falling down, but having his eyes open and uncovered:
17“I see Him, but not now;
I behold Him, but not near.
A star shall come forth from [the descendants of] Jacob,
A scepter shall rise out of [the descendants of] Israel
And shall crush the forehead of Moab
And destroy all the sons of Sheth.
18“Edom shall be [taken as] a possession,
[Mount] Seir, Israel’s enemies, also will be a possession,
While Israel performs valiantly.
19“One from [the descendants of] Jacob shall have dominion
And will destroy the remnant from the city.”

20Balaam looked at Amalek and took up his [fifth] discourse (oracle) and said:
“Amalek was the first of the [neighboring] nations [to oppose the Israelites after they left Egypt],
But his end shall be destruction.”

21And Balaam looked at the Kenites and took up his [sixth] discourse (oracle) and said:
“Strong is your dwelling place,
And you set your nest in the cliff.
22“Nevertheless the Kenites will be consumed.
How long will Asshur (Assyria) keep you (Israel) captive?”

23Then he took up his [seventh] discourse (oracle) and said:
“Alas, who can live unless God has ordained it?
24“But ships shall come from the coast of Kittim,
And shall afflict Asshur (Assyria) and Eber;
So they (the victors) also will come to destruction.”

25Then Balaam arose and departed and returned to his place, and Balak also went on his way.

Numbers 25
The Sin Of Peor

1Israel settled and remained in Shittim, and the people began to play the prostitute with the women of Moab [by being unfaithful to God]. 2For they invited the Israelites to the sacrifices of their gods, and the Israelites ate [food offered to idols] and bowed down to Moab’s gods. 3So Israel joined themselves to Baal of Peor [in worship]. And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel. 4The LORD said to Moses, “Take all the leaders of the people [who have committed sin with the Moabites], and execute them in broad daylight before the LORD, so that the fierce anger of the LORD may turn away from Israel.” 5So Moses said to the judges of Israel, “Each one of you must kill his men who have joined themselves to Baal of Peor [in worship].”

6Then one of the Israelites came and presented to his relatives a Midianite woman, in the sight of Moses and the whole congregation of the Israelites, while they were weeping [over God’s judgment] at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 7When Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw this, he left the congregation and took a spear in his hand, 8and he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and pierced both of them through the body, the man of Israel and the woman. Then the plague on the Israelites stopped. 9Nevertheless, those [Israelites] who died in the plague numbered 24,000.

The Zeal of Phinehas 10Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 11“Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my wrath away from the Israelites because he was jealous with My jealousy among them, so that I did not destroy the Israelites in My jealousy. 12Therefore say, ‘Behold, I give to Phinehas My covenant of peace. 13‘And it shall be for him and his descendants after him, a covenant of an everlasting priesthood, because he was jealous (impassioned) for [the unique honor and respect owed to] his God and made atonement for the sons of Israel.’”

14Now the name of the man of Israel who was killed with the Midianite woman was Zimri the son of Salu, a leader of a father’s household among the Simeonites. 15The name of the Midianite woman who was killed was Cozbi the daughter of Zur, who was the tribal head of a father’s household in Midian.

16Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 17“Provoke hostilities with the Midianites and attack them, 18for they harass you with their tricks, the tricks with which they have deceived you in the matter [of the Baal] of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of the leader of Midian, their sister, who was killed on the day of the plague because [of the Baal] of Peor.”

Numbers 26
Census Of A New Generation

1Then it happened after the plague that the LORD said to Moses and Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, 2“Take a census of all the [males in the] congregation of the sons of Israel from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers’ households, all in Israel who are able to go to war.” 3So Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with the people in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying, 4“A census of the people shall be taken from twenty years old and upward, just as the LORD has commanded Moses.”

Now the Israelites who came out of the land of Egypt were:

5Reuben, the firstborn of Israel (Jacob), the sons of Reuben: of Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the family of the Palluites; 6of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the family of the Carmites. 7These are the families (clans) of the Reubenites; and those who were numbered of them were 43,730. 8The son of Pallu: Eliab. 9The sons of Eliab: Nemuel and Dathan and Abiram. These are the Dathan and Abiram who were called by the congregation, who contended against Moses and Aaron in the company of Korah, when they contended against the LORD, 10and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up along with Korah, when that company died, when the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, so that they became a [warning] sign. 11But Korah’s sons did not die [because they did not participate in the rebellion].

12The sons of Simeon according to their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites; 13of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites; of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites. 14These are the families (clans) of the Simeonites, 22,200.

15The sons of Gad according to their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the Shunites; 16of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of Eri, the family of the Erites; 17of Arod, the family of the Arodites; of Areli, the family of the Arelites. 18These are the families (clans) of the sons of Gad according to those who were numbered, 40,500.

19The sons of Judah were Er and Onan, but Er and Onan [were judged by God and] died in the land of Canaan. 20The sons of Judah according to their families: of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the family of the Perezites; of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites. 21The sons of Perez: of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites. 22These are the families (clans) of Judah according to those who were numbered, 76,500.

23The sons of Issachar according to their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the family of the Punites; 24of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites. 25These are the families (clans) of Issachar according to those who were numbered, 64,300.

26The sons of Zebulun according to their families: of Sered, the family of the Seredites; of Elon, the family of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites. 27These are the families (clans) of the Zebulunites according to those who were numbered, 60,500.

28The sons of Joseph according to their families were Manasseh and Ephraim. 29The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites; and Machir was the father of Gilead; of Gilead, the family of the Gileadites. 30These are the sons of Gilead: of Iezer, the family of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of the Helekites; 31of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites; of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites; 32of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites; and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites. 33Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but only daughters, and the names of Zelophehad’s daughters were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 34These are the families (clans) of Manasseh; and those who were numbered of them were 52,700.

35These are the sons of Ephraim according to their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites. 36And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites. 37These are the families (clans) of the sons of Ephraim according to those who were numbered, 32,500. These are the descendants of Joseph according to their families (clans).

38The sons of Benjamin according to their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites; 39of Shephupham, the family of the Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites. 40The sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of the Naamites. 41These are the sons of Benjamin according to their families (clans); and those who were numbered, 45,600.

42These are the sons of Dan according to their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan according to their families. 43All the families (clans) of the Shuhamites according to those who were numbered, 64,400.

44Of the sons of Asher according to their families: of Imnah, the family of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Beriites. 45Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites. 46And the name of the daughter of Asher was Serah. 47These are the families (clans) of the sons of Asher according to those who were numbered, 53,400.

48Of the sons of Naphtali according to their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family of the Gunites; 49of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites. 50These are the families (clans) of Naphtali according to their families; and those who were numbered of them were 45,400.

51This was the [total] number of the [male] Israelites, 601,730 [twenty years old and upward who were able to go to war].

52And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 53“Among these the land shall be divided as an inheritance according to the number of names. 54To the larger tribe you shall give the larger inheritance, and to the smaller tribe the smaller inheritance; each tribe shall be given its inheritance according to its numbers. 55But the land shall be divided by lot. They shall receive their inheritance according to the names of the tribes of their fathers (tribal ancestors). 56“According to the [location selected by] lot, their inheritance shall be divided between the larger and the smaller [groups].”

57These are those who were numbered of the Levites according to their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the family of the Merarites. 58These are the families of Levi: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. And Kohath was the father of Amram. 59The name of Amram’s wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt; and to Amram she bore Aaron, Moses, and Miriam their sister. 60To Aaron were born Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 61But Nadab and Abihu died [in the presence of God] when they offered [in their ceremonial censers] strange [unholy, unacceptable, unauthorized] fire before the LORD. 62Those numbered of the Levites were 23,000, every male from a month old and upward; for they were not numbered among the sons of Israel, since no inheritance [of land] was given to them among the Israelites.

63These are those numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel [for the second time] in the plains of Moab by the Jordan [River] at Jericho. 64But among these there was not a man [left] of those numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel [for the first time] in the Wilderness of Sinai. 65For the LORD had said of them, “They shall certainly die in the wilderness.” And not a man was left of them except Caleb the son of Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun.

Numbers 27
A Law Of Inheritance

1Then the [five] daughters of Zelophehad the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, from the tribes of Manasseh [who was] the son of Joseph, approached [with a request]. These are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 2They stood before Moses, Eleazar the priest, the leaders, and all the congregation at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle), saying, 3“Our father died in the wilderness. He was not among those who assembled together against the LORD in the company of Korah, but he died for his own sin [as did all those who rebelled at Kadesh], and he had no sons. 4“Why should the name of our father be removed from his family because he had no son? Give to us a possession (land) among our father’s brothers.” 5So Moses brought their case before the LORD.

6Then the LORD said to Moses, 7“The request of the daughters of Zelophehad is justified. You shall certainly give them a possession as an inheritance among their father’s brothers, and you shall transfer their father’s inheritance to them. 8Further, you shall say to the Israelites, ‘If a man dies and has no son, you shall transfer his inheritance to his daughter. 9‘If a man has no daughter, then you shall give his inheritance to his brothers. 10‘If a man has no brothers, then you shall give his inheritance to his father’s brothers. 11‘If his father has no brothers, then you shall give his inheritance to his nearest relative in his own family, and he shall take possession of it. It shall be a statute and ordinance to the Israelites, just as the LORD has commanded Moses.’”

12Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go up to this mountain (Nebo) [in the] Abarim [range] and look at the land I have given to the sons of Israel. 13When you have seen it, you too will be gathered to your people [in death], just as Aaron your brother was gathered; 14because in the Wilderness of Zin, during the strife of the congregation, you rebelled against My command to treat me as holy [by following My instruction] before their eyes at the water.” (These are the waters of Meribah in Kadesh in the Wilderness of Zin.)

Joshua to Succeed Moses 15Then Moses spoke to the LORD, saying, 16“Let the LORD, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation 17who will go out and come in before them, and will lead them out and bring them in, so that the congregation of the LORD will not be as sheep without a shepherd.” 18The LORD said to Moses, “Take Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay your hand on him; 19and have him stand before Eleazar the priest and before the whole congregation, and give him a commission in their sight. 20You shall put some of your authority and honor on him, so that all the congregation of the Israelites will obey him. 21“He shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire before the LORD for him by the judgment (decision) of the Urim. At Joshua’s command the people shall go out and at his command they shall come in, he and all the congregation of Israel with him.” 22Moses did as the LORD commanded him. He took Joshua and had him stand before Eleazar the priest and the whole congregation, 23and Moses laid his hands on Joshua and commissioned him, just as the LORD had commanded through Moses.

Numbers 28
Laws For Offerings

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Command the Israelites and say to them, ‘You shall be careful to present at its appointed time [during the year] My offering, My food for My offerings by fire as a sweet and soothing aroma to Me.’ 3You shall say to the people, ‘This is the offering by fire which you shall present to the LORD every day: two male lambs one year old without blemish as a continual burnt offering. 4‘You shall offer one lamb in the morning and you shall offer the other lamb at twilight, 5also a tenth of an ephah of finely-milled flour as a grain offering, mixed with a fourth of a hin of pressed oil. 6‘It is a continual burnt offering which was ordained on Mount Sinai as a sweet and soothing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD. 7‘Its drink offering shall be a fourth of a hin for each lamb, in the holy place you shall pour out a strong drink offering to the LORD. 8‘The other lamb you shall offer at twilight; as the grain offering of the morning and as its drink offering, you shall offer it, an offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD.

9‘Then on the Sabbath day two male lambs one year old without blemish, and two-tenths [of an ephah] of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, and its drink offering. 10‘This is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, in addition to the continual burnt offering and its drink offering.

11‘Then at the beginning of [each of] your months you shall present a burnt offering to the LORD: two bulls, one ram, seven male lambs one year old without blemish; 12and three-tenths [of an ephah] of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, for each bull; and two-tenths [of an ephah] of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering, for the one ram; 13and a tenth [of an ephah] of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering for each lamb, as a burnt offering of a sweet and soothing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD. 14‘Their drink offerings shall be half a hin of wine for a bull, and a third of a hin for a ram, and a fourth of a hin for a lamb. This is the burnt offering of each month throughout the months of the year. 15‘And one male goat as a sin offering to the LORD; it shall be offered with its drink offering in addition to the continual burnt offering.

16‘The LORD’S Passover shall be on the fourteenth day of the first month [of each year]. 17‘There shall be a feast on the fifteenth day of this month; unleavened bread shall be eaten for seven days. 18‘On the first day there shall be a holy [summoned] assembly; you shall do no laborious work that day. 19‘But you shall present an offering by fire, a burnt offering to the LORD: two bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs one year old, without blemish. 20‘For their grain offering you shall offer fine flour mixed with oil; three-tenths [of an ephah] for the bull, and two-tenths for the ram; 21you shall offer a tenth [of an ephah] for each of the seven male lambs; 22and one male goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you. 23‘You shall present these in addition to the burnt offering of the morning, which is for a continual burnt offering. 24‘In this way you shall present daily, for seven days, the food of the offering by fire, a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD; it shall be presented with its drink offering in addition to the continual burnt offering. 25‘On the seventh day you shall have a holy [summoned] assembly; you shall do no laborious work.

26‘Also on the day of the first fruits, when you offer a new grain offering to the LORD at your Feast of Weeks, you shall have a holy [summoned] assembly; you shall do no laborious work. 27‘You shall present the burnt offering as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD: two young bulls, one ram, seven male lambs one year old; 28and their grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil; three-tenths [of an ephah] for each bull, two-tenths for the one ram, 29a tenth for each of the seven male lambs, 30and one male goat to make atonement for you. 31‘In addition to the continual burnt offering and its grain offering, you shall present them with their drink offerings. They shall be without blemish.

Numbers 29
Offerings Of The Seventh Month

1‘On the first day of the seventh month, you shall have a holy [summoned] assembly; you shall do no laborious work. It will be for you a day of blowing the trumpets (the shophar, ram’s horn). 2‘You shall offer a burnt offering as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD: one bull, one ram, and seven male lambs one year old without blemish; 3also their grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil, three-tenths [of an ephah] for the bull, two-tenths for the ram, 4and one-tenth [of an ephah] for each of the seven lambs, 5and one male goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you. 6‘These are in addition to the burnt offering of the New Moon and its grain offering, and the continual burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings, according to the ordinance for them, as a sweet and soothing aroma, an offering by fire to the LORD.

7‘Then on the tenth day of this seventh month you shall have a holy [summoned] assembly [for the Day of Atonement]; and you shall humble yourselves; you shall not do any work. 8‘You shall present a burnt offering to the LORD as a sweet and soothing aroma: one bull, one ram, and seven male lambs one year old, which are without blemish; 9and their grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil, three-tenths [of an ephah] for the bull, two-tenths for the one ram, 10a tenth [of an ephah] for each of the seven lambs, 11one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the sin offering of atonement, and the continual burnt offering and its grain offering, and their drink offerings.

12‘Then on the fifteenth day of the seventh month you shall have a holy [summoned] assembly; you shall do no laborious work, and you shall observe a Feast [of Booths] to the LORD for seven days. 13‘You shall present a burnt offering, an offering by fire as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD: thirteen bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs one year old, which are without blemish; 14and their grain offering, fine flour mixed with oil, three-tenths [of an ephah] for each of the thirteen bulls, two-tenths for each of the two rams, 15and a tenth [of an ephah] for each of the fourteen lambs; 16also one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering, its grain offering and its drink offering.

17‘Then on the second day [of the Feast of Booths]: twelve bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without blemish, 18with their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance, 19also one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and their drink offerings.

20‘Then on the third day [of the Feast of Booths]: eleven bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs one year old without blemish, 21with their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance, 22and one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.

23‘Then on the fourth day [of the Feast of Booths]: ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs one year old without blemish; 24their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance, 25and one male goat as a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offering.

26‘Then on the fifth day [of the Feast of Booths]: nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs one year old without blemish, 27and their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance; 28and one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering, and its grain offering, and its drink offering.

29‘Then on the sixth day [of the Feast of Booths]: eight bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs one year old without blemish; 30and their grain offering and their drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance, 31and one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering, its grain offering, and its drink offerings.

32‘Then on the seventh day [of the Feast of Booths]: seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs one year old without blemish, 33and their grain offering and drink offerings for the bulls, the rams, and the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance; 34and one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering, and its grain offering, and its drink offering.

35‘On the eighth day you shall have a solemn assembly [to mark the end of the feast]; you shall do no laborious work. 36‘You shall present a burnt offering, an offering by fire, as a sweet and soothing aroma to the LORD: one bull, one ram, seven male lambs one year old without blemish; 37their grain offering and drink offerings for the bull, the ram, and the lambs, by their number according to the ordinance, 38and one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the continual burnt offering, and its grain offering, and its drink offering.

39‘You shall present these to the LORD at your appointed times, in addition the offerings you have vowed and your freewill offerings, as your burnt offerings, grain offerings, drink offerings, and as your peace offerings.’” 40So Moses spoke to the Israelites in accordance with everything that the LORD had commanded him.

Numbers 30
The Law Of Vows

1Then Moses spoke to the leaders of the tribes of the Israelites, saying, “This is the thing which the LORD has commanded: 2If a man makes a vow to the LORD or swears an oath to bind himself with a pledge [of abstinence], he shall not break (violate, profane) his word; he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.

3“Also if a woman makes a vow to the LORD and binds herself by a pledge [of abstinence], while living in her father’s house in her youth, 4and her father hears her vow and her pledge by which she has bound herself, and he offers no objection, then all her vows shall stand and every pledge by which she has bound herself shall stand. 5But if her father disapproves of her [making her vow] on the day that he hears about it, none of her vows or her pledges by which she has bound herself shall stand; and the LORD will forgive her because her father has disapproved of her [making the vow].

6“But if she marries while under her vows or if she has bound herself by a rash statement, 7and her husband hears of it and says nothing about it on the day he hears it, then her vows shall stand and her pledge by which she bound herself shall stand. 8But if her husband disapproves of her [making her vow or pledge] on the day that he hears of it, then he shall annul her vow which she is under and the rash statement of her lips by which she bound herself; and the LORD will forgive her.

9“But the vow of a widow or of a divorced woman, everything by which she has bound herself, shall stand against her. 10However, if she vowed in her husband’s house or bound herself by a pledge with an oath, 11and her husband heard it, but said nothing to her and did not disapprove of her [making the vow], then all her vows and every pledge by which she bound herself shall stand. 12But if her husband absolutely annuls them on the day he heard them, then whatever proceeds from her lips concerning her vows or concerning her pledge shall not stand. Her husband has annulled them, and the LORD will forgive her.

13“Every vow and every binding oath to humble herself, her husband may confirm it or her husband may annul it. 14But if her husband says nothing to her [concerning the matter] from day to day, then he confirms all her vows or all her pledges which are on her. He has confirmed them because he said nothing to her on the day he heard them. 15“But if he indeed nullifies them after he hears of them, then he shall be responsible for and bear her guilt [for breaking her promise].”

16These are the statutes which the LORD commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, and between a father and his daughter while she is a youth in her father’s house.

Numbers 31
The Slaughter Of Midian

1The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Take vengeance for the Israelites on the Midianites; afterward you will be gathered to your people [in death].” 3Moses spoke to the people, saying, “Arm men from among you for war, so that they may go against Midian to execute the LORD’S vengeance on Midian [for seducing Israel to participate in idolatry]. 4“A thousand [fighting men] from each tribe of all the tribes of Israel you shall send to the war.” 5So out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand from each tribe were selected, twelve thousand armed for war. 6Moses sent them, a thousand from each tribe, to the war, and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to war with them, and the sacred vessels [of the sanctuary] and the trumpets to blow the alarm in his hand. 7They made war against Midian, just as the LORD had commanded Moses, and they killed every male. 8They killed the kings of Midian along with the rest of their slain: Evi and Rekem and Zur [the father of Cozbi] and Hur and Reba, the five kings of Midian; also Balaam the son of Beor they killed with the sword. 9The sons of Israel captured the women of Midian and their children; and all their cattle, all their livestock, and all their property they took as spoil [of war]. 10They burned all the cities where they lived, and all their encampments with fire. 11They took all the plunder and all the spoils of war, both people and livestock. 12Then they brought the captives, the spoils, and the plunder to Moses and to Eleazar the priest and to the congregation of the Israelites at the camp on the plains of Moab by the Jordan [River] across from Jericho.

13Moses and Eleazar the priest and all the leaders of the congregation went out to meet them outside the camp. 14But Moses was angry with the officers of the army, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, who served in the war. 15And Moses said to them, “Have you let all the women live? 16Look, these [are the women who] caused the Israelites, by the counsel of Balaam, to trespass against the LORD in the matter of Peor, and so a plague came among the congregation of the LORD. 17Now therefore, kill every male among the children, and kill every woman who is not a virgin. 18But all the young girls who have not known a man intimately, keep alive for yourselves [to marry]. 19Camp outside the camp for seven days; whoever has killed any person and whoever has touched any dead body, purify yourselves and your captives, on the third day and on the seventh day. 20“You shall purify every garment and every article made of leather and all the things made of goats’ hair, and every article made of wood.”

21Then Eleazar the priest said to the men of war who had gone to battle, “This is the statute of the law which the LORD has commanded Moses: 22only the gold, the silver, the bronze, the iron, the tin, and the lead, 23everything that can stand fire, you shall pass through fire, and it shall be clean. Nevertheless, it shall also be purified with the water of purification [to remove its impurity]; and all that cannot stand fire [such as fabrics] you shall pass through water. 24“And you shall wash your clothes on the seventh day and be clean, and afterward you may come into the camp.”

Division of the Spoil of War 25Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 26“You and Eleazar the priest and the leaders of the fathers’ households of the congregation are to take a count of the spoil of war that was captured, both people and livestock. 27Divide the spoil into two [equal] parts between those who were involved in the war, that is, those who went out to battle and all [the rest of] the congregation. 28Levy a tax for the LORD from the warriors who went to battle, one in five hundred of the persons, the oxen, the donkeys, and the flocks. 29Take this tribute from the warriors’ half and give it to Eleazar the priest as an offering to the LORD. 30“From the Israelites’ half [of the spoil] you shall take one out of every fifty of the persons, the oxen, the donkeys, the flocks, and of all the livestock, and give them to the Levites who are in charge of the tabernacle of the LORD.” 31Moses and Eleazar the priest did just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

32The plunder that remained from the spoil of war which the warriors had taken, was 675,000 sheep, 33and 72,000 cattle, 34and 61,000 donkeys, 35and 32,000 persons in all, of the [Midianite] women who were virgins.

36The half share, the portion of those who went to war, was 337,500 sheep in number, 37and the LORD’S levy (tax) of the sheep was 675; 38the cattle were 36,000, from which the LORD’S levy was 72; 39the donkeys were 30,500, from which the LORD’S levy was 61; 40the persons were 16,000, from whom the LORD’S levy was 32 persons. 41Moses gave the levy which was the LORD’S offering to Eleazar the priest, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

42As for the Israelites’ half, which Moses separated from that of the warriors— 43now the congregation’s half was 337,500 sheep, 44and 36,000 cattle, 45and 30,500 donkeys, 46and 16,000 people— 47and from the Israelites’ half, Moses took one out of every fifty, both of persons and animals, and gave them to the Levites, who were in charge of the tabernacle of the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

48Then the officers who were over the thousands of the army, the commanders of thousands and hundreds, approached Moses, 49and they said to him, “Your servants have counted the warriors under our command, and not one man of us is missing. 50“So we have brought as an offering to the LORD what each man obtained—articles of gold, armlets, bracelets, signet rings, earrings, necklaces—to make atonement for ourselves before the LORD.” 51Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from them, all the handmade articles. 52All the gold of the offering which they presented to the LORD from the commanders of thousands and of hundreds was 16,750 shekels. 53For the men of war had taken plunder, every man for himself. 54So Moses and Eleazar the priest received the gold from the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle) as a memorial for the sons of Israel before the LORD.

Numbers 32
Reuben And Gad Settle In Gilead

1Now the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad had very large herds of cattle, and they saw the land of Jazer and the land of Gilead [on the east side of the Jordan River], and indeed, the place was suitable for raising livestock. 2So the sons of Gad and of Reuben came and spoke to Moses, to Eleazar the priest, and to the leaders of the congregation, saying, 3“[The country around] Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo, and Beon, 4the land which the LORD conquered before the congregation of Israel, is a land [suitable] for livestock, and your servants have [very large herds of] livestock.” 5They said, “If we have found favor in your sight, let this land be given to your servants as a possession. Do not take us across the Jordan [River].”

6But Moses said to the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben, “Shall your brothers go to war while you sit here? 7Now why are you discouraging the hearts of the Israelites from crossing over into the land which the LORD has given them? 8This is what your fathers did when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land! 9For when they went up to the Valley of Eshcol and saw the land, they discouraged the hearts of the Israelites so that they did not go into the land which the LORD had given them. 10And the LORD’S anger was kindled on that day and He swore an oath, saying, 11‘None of the men who came up from Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I promised to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, because they have not followed Me completely, 12except Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua the son of Nun, for they have followed the LORD completely.’ 13So the LORD’S anger was kindled against the sons of Israel (Jacob) and He made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until the entire generation of those who had done evil in the sight of the LORD was destroyed. 14Now look, you [the tribes of Reuben and Gad] have risen up in your fathers’ place, a brood of sinful men, to add still more to the fierce anger of the LORD against Israel. 15“For if you turn back from following Him [completely], He will once again leave them in the wilderness, and you will destroy all these people.”

16But the people of Reuben and Gad approached Moses and said, “We will build sheepfolds here for our flocks and [walled] cities for our children, 17but we will be armed and ready to go to war before the [other tribes of the] Israelites, until we have brought them to their place, while our children live in the fortified cities because of the inhabitants of the land. 18We will not return to our homes until every one of the [other] sons of Israel has taken possession of his inheritance. 19“For we will not inherit with them on the west side of the Jordan and beyond, because our inheritance has come to us on this side of the Jordan [River] toward the east.”

20Moses replied, “If you will do as you say, if you will arm yourselves before the LORD for war, 21and every armed man of yours will cross the Jordan before the LORD until He has driven out His enemies before Him, 22and the land [west of the Jordan] is subdued before the LORD, then afterward you shall return and be blameless [in this matter] before the LORD and before Israel, and this land [east of the Jordan] shall be yours as a possession before the LORD. 23But if you do not do this, behold, you will have sinned against the LORD; and be sure that your sin will find you out. 24“Build yourselves cities for your children, and folds for your sheep, and do that of which you have spoken.”

25Then the descendants of Gad and of Reuben said to Moses, “Your servants will do just as my lord commands. 26Our children, our wives, our livestock, and all our cattle shall be there in the cities of Gilead. 27“But your servants will cross over, every man armed for war, before the LORD to the battle, just as my lord says.”

28So Moses gave the command concerning them to Eleazar the priest, and to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the leaders of the fathers’ households of the tribes of the Israelites. 29Moses said to them, “If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben will cross over the Jordan with you, every man armed for battle before the LORD, and the land is subdued before you, then you shall give them the land of Gilead [east of the Jordan River] as a possession; 30but if they will not cross over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan [and surrender their right to their land east of the Jordan River].” 31The sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben answered, “As the LORD has said to your servants, so will we do. 32“We will cross over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan, so that the possession of our inheritance on [the east] side of the Jordan may be ours.”

33So Moses gave to them, to the sons of Gad and to the sons of Reuben and to the half-tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon, the king of the Amorites and the kingdom of Og, the king of Bashan, the land with its cities and territories, the cities of the surrounding land. 34The sons of Gad built Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer, 35Atroth-shophan, Jazer, Jogbehah, 36Beth-nimrah, and Beth-haran, fortified (walled) cities, and sheepfolds for sheep. 37The sons of Reuben built Heshbon, Elealeh, Kiriathaim, 38Nebo, and Baal-meon (their names being changed) and Sibmah; and they gave other names to the cities which they built. 39The sons of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead and took it, and drove out the Amorites who were in it. 40So Moses gave Gilead to [the tribe of] Machir the son of Manasseh, and they settled in it. 41[The sons of] Jair the son of Manasseh went and took its towns (tent villages) and called them Havvoth-jair. 42Nobah went and took Kenath and its villages, and called it Nobah after his own name.

Numbers 33
Review Of The Journey From Egypt To Jordan

1These are the stages of the journeys of the Israelites, by which they came out of the land of Egypt by their [tribal] armies, under the leadership of Moses and Aaron. 2Moses recorded their points of departure, as the LORD commanded, stage by stage; and these are their journeys according to their points of departure: 3They set out from Rameses on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the day after the Passover the Israelites moved out triumphantly in the sight of all the Egyptians, 4while the Egyptians were burying all their firstborn whom the LORD had struck down among them. Upon their gods the LORD also executed judgments.

5Then the Israelites moved out from Rameses [where they had all joined together], and camped in Succoth. 6They moved out from Succoth and camped in Etham, which is on the edge of the wilderness. 7They moved out from Etham and turned back to Pi-hahiroth, east of Baal-zephon, and they camped before Migdol. 8They moved out from before Pi-hahiroth and passed through the midst of the [Red] Sea into the wilderness; and they went a three days’ journey in the Wilderness of Etham and camped at Marah. 9They moved out from Marah and came to Elim; in Elim there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees, and they camped there. 10They moved out from Elim and camped by the Red Sea (Sea of Reeds). 11They moved out from the Red Sea and camped in the Wilderness of Sin. 12They moved out from the Wilderness of Sin and camped at Dophkah. 13They moved out from Dophkah and camped at Alush. 14They moved out from Alush and camped at Rephidim; now it was there that the people had no water to drink. 15They moved out from Rephidim and camped in the Wilderness of Sinai [where they remained for about a year]. 16They moved out from the Wilderness of Sinai and camped at Kibroth-hattaavah.

17They moved out from Kibroth-hattaavah and camped at Hazeroth. 18They moved out from Hazeroth and camped at Rithmah [near Kadesh, the place from which the twelve spies were sent to spy out the land of Canaan]. 19They moved out from Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez. 20They moved out from Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah. 21They moved out from Libnah and camped at Rissah. 22They moved out from Rissah and camped at Kehelathah. 23They moved out from Kehelathah and camped at Mount Shepher. 24They moved out from Mount Shepher and camped at Haradah. 25They moved out from Haradah and camped at Makheloth. 26They moved out from Makheloth and camped at Tahath. 27They moved out from Tahath and camped at Terah. 28They moved out from Terah and camped at Mithkah. 29They moved out from Mithkah and camped at Hashmonah. 30They moved out from Hashmonah and camped at Moseroth. 31They moved out from Moseroth and camped at Bene-jaakan. 32They moved out from Bene-jaakan and camped at Hor-haggidgad. 33They moved out from Hor-haggidgad and camped at Jotbathah. 34They moved out from Jotbathah and camped at Abronah. 35They moved out from Abronah and camped at Ezion-geber [or Elath on the gulf of Aqabah]. 36They moved out from Ezion-geber and camped in the Wilderness of Zin, which is Kadesh. 37They moved out from Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor, on the edge of the land of Edom.

38Aaron the priest went up on Mount Hor at the command of the LORD, and died there in the fortieth year after the Israelites came out of the land of Egypt, on the first day of the fifth month. 39Aaron was a hundred and twenty-three years old when he died on Mount Hor.

40The Canaanite king of Arad, who lived in the Negev (the South country) in the land of Canaan, heard that the sons of Israel were coming.

41They moved out from Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah. 42Then they moved out from Zalmonah and camped at Punon. 43They moved out from Punon and camped at Oboth. 44They moved out from Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim, on the border of Moab. 45They moved out from Iyim (Iye-abarim) and camped at Dibon-gad. 46They moved out from Dibon-gad and camped at Almon-diblathaim. 47They moved out from Almon-diblathaim and camped in the mountains of Abarim, before [Mount] Nebo. 48They moved out from the mountains of Abarim and camped in the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho [their last stop on the journey to Canaan]. 49They camped by the Jordan from Beth-jeshimoth as far as Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.

Law of Possessing the Land 50Then the LORD spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho, saying, 51“Say to the children of Israel, ‘When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan, 52then you shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land before you and destroy all their sculpted images, and destroy all their cast idols and completely eliminate all their [idolatrous] high places, 53and you shall take possession of the land and live in it, for I have given the land to you to possess. 54‘You shall inherit the land by lot according to your families; to the large tribe you shall give a larger inheritance, and to the small tribe you shall give a smaller inheritance. Wherever the lot falls to any man, that shall be [the location of] his [inheritance]. According to the tribes of your fathers (ancestors) you shall inherit. 55‘But if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you, then those you let remain of them will be like pricks in your eyes and like thorns in your sides, and they will attack you in the land in which you live. 56‘And as I [the LORD] planned to do to them, so I will do to you.’”

Numbers 34
Instruction For Apportioning Canaan

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2“Command the Israelites, ‘When you enter the land of Canaan, this is the land that shall be yours as an inheritance, the land of Canaan according to its boundaries, 3your southern region shall be from the Wilderness of Zin along the side of Edom, and your southern boundary from the end of the Salt (Dead) Sea eastward. 4‘Your boundary shall turn from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and continue on to Zin, and its limit shall be south of Kadesh-barnea. Then it shall go on to Hazar-addar and pass on to Azmon. 5‘Then the boundary shall turn from Azmon to the Brook of Egypt (Wadi el-arish), and its limit shall be at the [Mediterranean] Sea.

6‘As the western boundary you shall have the Great [Mediterranean] Sea and its coastline. This shall be your western boundary.

7‘And this shall be your north border: from the Great [Mediterranean] Sea mark out your boundary line to Mount Hor; 8from Mount Hor you shall mark out your boundary to the entrance of Hamath, and the limit of the border shall be at Zedad; 9then the [northern] boundary shall go on to Ziphron, and its limit shall be at Hazar-enan. This shall be your northern boundary.

10‘You shall mark out your eastern boundary from Hazar-enan to Shepham; 11the [eastern] boundary shall go down from Shepham to Riblah on the east side of Ain and shall descend and reach to the slope on the east of the Sea of Chinnereth [the Sea of Galilee]; 12and the [eastern] boundary shall go down to the Jordan [River], and its limit shall be at the Salt (Dead) Sea. This shall be your land according to its boundaries all around.’”

13So Moses commanded the Israelites, saying, “This is the land you are to inherit by lot, which the LORD has commanded to be given to the nine tribes and the half-tribe [of Manasseh], 14for the tribe of the sons of Reuben and the tribe of the sons of Gad have received their inheritance by their fathers’ households, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received their possession. 15“The two and a half tribes have received their inheritance across the Jordan [River] opposite Jericho, eastward toward the sunrise.”

16Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 17“These are the names of the men who shall divide the land among you as an inheritance: Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun. 18You shall take one leader from every tribe to divide the land for the inheritance. 19These are the names of the men: From the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh; 20from the tribe of the sons of Simeon, Samuel the son of Ammihud; 21from the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon; 22from the tribe of the sons of Dan a leader, Bukki the son of Jogli; 23of the sons of Joseph: from the tribe of the sons of Manasseh a leader, Hanniel the son of Ephod; 24from the tribe of the sons of Ephraim a leader, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan; 25from the tribe of the sons of Zebulun a leader, Elizaphan the son of Parnach; 26from the tribe of the sons of Issachar a leader, Paltiel the son of Azzan; 27from the tribe of the sons of Asher a leader, Ahihud the son of Shelomi; 28from the tribe of the sons of Naphtali a leader, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.” 29These are the [twelve] men whom the LORD commanded [to work with Joshua and Eleazar] to divide the inheritance to the sons of Israel in the land of Canaan.

Numbers 35
Cities For The Levites

1Then the LORD spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan [across from] Jericho, saying, 2“Command the Israelites to give to the Levites cities to live in from the inheritance of their possession; and you shall give to the Levites pasture lands around the cities. 3The cities shall be theirs to live in; and their pasture lands shall be for their cattle and for their herds and for all their livestock.

4“The pasture lands around the cities which you shall give to the Levites shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits (1,500 ft.) around. 5You shall also measure outside the city on the east, south, west, and north sides two thousand cubits (3,000 ft.), with the city in the center. This shall belong to the Levites as pasture lands for the cities. Cities of Refuge 6[Among] the cities which you give to the Levites shall be the six cities of refuge, which you shall provide for the one who commits manslaughter to flee to; and in addition to them you shall give forty-two cities [to the Levites]. 7So you shall give to the Levites forty-eight cities in all, together with their pasture lands. 8“As for the cities which you shall give from the possession of the Israelites, from the larger tribes you shall take many and from the smaller tribes few; each tribe shall give [at least some] of its cities to the Levites in proportion to [the size of] its inheritance which it possesses.”

9Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 10“Tell the Israelites, ‘When you cross the Jordan [River] into the land of Canaan, 11then you shall select for yourselves cities to be cities of refuge, so that the one who kills any person unintentionally may escape there. 12‘The cities shall be to you as a refuge from the avenger, so that the one who has caused the death of another will not be killed until he has had a [fair] trial before the congregation. 13‘The cities which you are to provide shall be your six cities of refuge. 14‘You shall provide three cities on this [east] side of the Jordan [River], and three [more] cities in the land of Canaan; they are to be the cities of refuge. 15‘These six cities shall be a refuge for the Israelites and for the stranger and the resident alien among them; so that anyone who kills a person unintentionally may escape there.

16‘But if he struck his victim down [intentionally] with an iron object so that he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall certainly be put to death. 17‘If he struck his victim down [intentionally] with a stone in hand, which may cause a person to die, and he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall certainly be put to death. 18‘Or if he struck his victim down [intentionally] with a wooden object in hand, which may cause a person to die, and he died, he is a murderer; the murderer shall certainly be put to death. 19‘The blood avenger shall himself put the murderer to death; he shall put him to death when he meets him. 20‘But if he pushed his victim out of hatred or threw something at him with malicious intent, and he died, 21or if, in enmity, he struck the victim down with his hand, and he died, the one that struck the victim shall certainly be put to death; he is a murderer. The blood avenger shall put the murderer to death when he meets him.

22‘But if he pushed the victim suddenly, not in enmity, or threw anything at him without malicious intent, 23or without seeing him hit him [accidentally] with a stone object that could kill him, and he died, and [the offender] was not his enemy nor intending to harm him, 24then the congregation shall judge between the offender and the blood avenger according to these ordinances. 25‘The congregation shall rescue the offender from the hand of the blood avenger and return him to his city of refuge, [the place] to which he had escaped; and he shall live there until the death of the high priest who was anointed with the sacred oil. 26‘But if at any time the one guilty of manslaughter comes outside the border of his city of refuge to which he fled, 27and the blood avenger finds him outside the border of his city of refuge and kills the offender, the blood avenger will not be guilty of murder, 28because the offender should have remained in his city of refuge until the death of the high priest. But after the high priest’s death the offender shall return to the land of his possession.

29‘These things shall be a statute for you throughout your generations wherever you may be.

30‘If anyone kills a person [intentionally], the murderer shall be put to death on the testimony of [two or more] witnesses; but no one shall be put to death on the testimony of [only] one witness. 31‘Moreover, you shall not accept a ransom [in exchange] for the life of a murderer guilty and sentenced to death; but he shall certainly be put to death. 32‘You shall not accept a ransom for him who has escaped to his city of refuge, so that he may return to live in his [own] land before the death of the high priest. 33‘So you shall not pollute and defile the land in which you live; for [the shedding of innocent] blood pollutes and defiles the land. No atonement (expiation) can be made for the land for the [innocent] blood shed in it, except by the blood (execution) of him who shed it. 34‘You shall not defile the land in which you live, in the midst of which I live, for I, the LORD, live among the people of Israel.’”

Numbers 36
Inheritance By Marriage

1The leaders of the fathers’ households of the family of the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, approached and spoke before Moses and before the leaders, the heads of the fathers’ households of the Israelites, 2and they said, “The LORD commanded my lord [Moses] to give the land by lot to the sons of Israel as an inheritance, and my lord was commanded by the LORD to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother to his daughters. 3But if the daughters marry any of the men from any of the other tribes of Israel, then their inheritance will be taken away from that of our fathers (tribal ancestors) and will be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they belong; so it will be taken away from our allotted inheritance. 4“When the [year of] Jubilee of the Israelites comes, then their inheritance will be added [permanently] to that of the tribe to which they belong; so their inheritance will be taken away from that of the tribe of our fathers (tribal ancestors).”

5Then Moses commanded the Israelites in accordance with the word of the LORD, saying, “The statement of the tribe of the sons of Joseph is correct. 6This is what the LORD commands regarding the daughters of Zelophehad: ‘Let them marry whom they wish; only they must marry within the family of the tribe of their father.’ 7So no inheritance of the Israelites shall be transferred from tribe to tribe, for every one of the Israelites shall hold to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers (tribal ancestors). 8Every daughter who possesses an inheritance [of land] in any one of the tribes of the Israelites shall marry [only] a man whose family is of her father’s tribe, so that the Israelites may each possess the inheritance of his fathers (tribal ancestors). 9“So no inheritance shall be transferred from one tribe to another, but each of the tribes of the Israelites shall hold to its own inheritance.”

10The daughters of Zelophehad did as the LORD commanded Moses. 11For Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married to sons of their father’s brothers. 12They married into the families of the descendants of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.

13These are the commandments and the ordinances (judgments) which the LORD commanded through Moses to the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan [across from] Jericho.

Deuteronomy 1
Israel’s History After The Exodus

1These are the words which Moses spoke to all Israel [while they were still] beyond [that is, on the east side of] the Jordan [River] in the wilderness [across from Jerusalem], in the Arabah [the long, deep valley running north and south from the eastern arm of the Red Sea to beyond the Dead Sea] opposite Suph, between Paran and Tophel and Laban and Hazeroth and Dizahab (place of gold). 2It is [only] eleven days’ journey from Horeb (Mount Sinai) by way of Mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea [on Canaan’s border; yet Israel wandered in the wilderness for forty years before crossing the border and entering Canaan, the promised land]. 3In the fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses spoke to the children of Israel in accordance with all that the LORD had commanded him to say to them, 4after he had defeated Sihon the king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who lived at Ashtaroth in Edrei. 5Beyond (east of) the Jordan in the land of Moab, Moses began to explain this law, saying,

6“The LORD our God spoke to us at Horeb, saying, ‘You have stayed long enough on this mountain. 7‘Turn and resume your journey, and go to the hill country of the Amorites, and to all their neighbors in the Arabah, in the hill country and in the lowland (the Shephelah), in the Negev (South country) and on the coast of the [Mediterranean] Sea, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates. 8‘Look, I have set the land before you; go in and take possession of the land which the LORD swore (solemnly promised) to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them and to their descendants after them.’

9“I spoke to you at that time, saying, ‘I am not able to bear the burden of you alone. 10‘The LORD your God has multiplied you, and look, today you are as numerous as the stars of heaven. 11‘May the LORD, the God of your fathers, add to you a thousand times as many as you are and bless you, just as He has promised you! 12‘How can I alone bear the weight and pressure and burden of you and your strife (contention) and complaining? 13‘Choose for yourselves wise, understanding, experienced, and respected men from your tribes, and I will appoint them as heads (leaders) over you.’ 14And you answered me, ‘The thing which you have said to do is good.’ 15So I took the leaders of your tribes, wise and experienced men, and made them leaders over you, commanders of thousands, and hundreds, and fifties, and tens, and officers (administrators) for your tribes.

16“Then I commanded your judges at that time, saying, ‘Hear the matters between your brothers [your fellow countrymen], and judge righteously and fairly between a man and his brother, or the stranger (resident alien, foreigner) who is with him. 17‘You shall not show partiality in judgment; you shall hear and pay attention to the [cases of the] least [important] as well as the great. You shall not fear man, for the judgment is God’s. The case that is too hard for you [to judge], you shall bring to me, and I will hear it.’ 18I commanded you at that time [regarding] all the things that you should do.

19“Then we set out from Horeb (Sinai), and went through all that great and terrible wilderness which you saw on the way to the hill country of the Amorites, just as the LORD our God commanded us; and we came to Kadesh-barnea. 20And I said to you, ‘You have come to the hill country of the Amorites which the LORD our God is about to give us. 21‘Behold, the LORD your God has set the land before you; go up and take possession of it, just as the LORD, the God of your fathers, has spoken to you. Do not fear or be dismayed.’

22“Then all of you approached me and said, ‘Let us send men [into the land] before us, so that they may explore and search the area for us, and bring back to us word regarding the way we should go, and the cities we should enter.’ 23The plan pleased me and I took twelve of your men, one man from each tribe. 24They turned and went up into the hill country, and came to the Valley of Eshcol and spied it out. 25Then they took some of the fruit of the land in their hands and brought it down to us; and they reported back to us, and said, ‘It is a good land which the LORD our God is about to give us.’

26“Yet you were not willing to go up [to take possession of it], but rebelled against the command of the LORD your God. 27You murmured and were ill-tempered (discontented) in your tents, and said, ‘Because the LORD hates us He has brought us from the land of Egypt to hand us over to the Amorites to destroy us. 28‘Where can we go up? Our brothers (spies) have made our hearts melt [in fear] and demoralized us by saying, “The people are bigger and taller than we; the cities are large, and fortified [all the way up] to heaven. And besides, we saw the [giant-like] sons of the Anakim there.”’ 29Then I said to you, ‘Do not be shocked, nor fear them. 30‘The LORD your God who goes before you will fight for you Himself, just as He did for you in Egypt before your [very] eyes, 31and in the wilderness where you saw how the LORD your God carried and protected you, just as a man carries his son, all along the way which you traveled until you arrived at this place.’ 32Yet in spite of this word, you did not trust [that is, confidently rely on and believe] the LORD your God, 33who went before you along the way, in fire by night and in a cloud by day, to seek a place for you to make camp and to show you the way in which you should go.

34“And the LORD heard the sound of your words, and He was angry and took an oath, saying, 35‘Not one of these men, this evil generation, shall see the good land which I swore (solemnly promised) to give to your fathers, 36except Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him and to his children I will give the land on which he has walked, because he has followed the LORD completely [and remained true to Him].’ 37The LORD was angry with me also because of you, saying, ‘Not even you shall enter Canaan. 38‘Joshua the son of Nun, who stands before you, he shall enter there. Encourage and strengthen him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it. 39‘Moreover, your little ones whom you said would become prey, and your sons, who today have no knowledge of good or evil, shall enter Canaan, and I will give it to them and they shall possess it. 40‘But as for you, turn around and set out for the wilderness by way of the Red Sea (Sea of Reeds).’

41“Then you answered and said to me, ‘We have sinned against the LORD. We will go up and fight, just as the LORD our God has commanded us.’ So you equipped every man with weapons of war, and regarded it as easy to go up into the hill country. 42“But the LORD said to me, ‘Say to them, “Do not go up and do not fight, for I am not among you [because of your rebellion]; otherwise you will be [badly] defeated by your enemies.”’ 43So I spoke to you, but you would not listen. Instead you rebelled against the command of the LORD, and acted presumptuously and went up into the hill country. 44Then the Amorites who lived in that hill country came out against you and chased you as bees do, and struck you down in Seir as far as Hormah. 45And you returned and wept before the LORD; but the LORD would not listen to your voice nor pay attention to you. 46So you stayed in Kadesh; many days you stayed there.

Deuteronomy 2
Wanderings In The Wilderness

1“Then we turned and set out for the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea, just as the LORD had told me; and we circled Mount Seir for many days. 2And the LORD spoke to me, saying, 3‘You have circled this mountain long enough; turn northward, 4and command the people, saying, “You are passing through the territory of your brothers the sons of Esau (the Edomites), who live in Seir; and they will be afraid of you. So be very careful; 5do not provoke them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even as little as a footstep, because I have given Mount Seir to Esau as a possession. 6You shall buy food from them with money so that you may [have something to] eat, and you shall also buy water from them with money so that you may [have something to] drink. 7“For the LORD your God has blessed you in all that you have done; He has known about your wanderings through this great wilderness. These forty years the LORD your God has been with you; you have lacked nothing.”’

8“So we passed beyond our brothers the sons of Esau, who lived in Seir, away from the Arabah (wilderness) road, away from Elath and from Ezion-geber. Then we turned and passed through by the way of the Wilderness of Moab. 9And the LORD said to me, ‘Do not harass [the descendants of] Moab, nor provoke them to war, for I will not give you any of their land as a possession, because I have given Ar to the sons (Moab and Ammon) of Lot as a possession.’ 10(The Emim lived there in times past, a people great and numerous, and as tall as the Anakim. 11These also are regarded as Rephaim [an ancient people], as are the Anakim, but the Moabites call them Emim. 12The Horites also used to live in Seir, but the sons of Esau dispossessed them. They destroyed them from before them and settled in their place, just as Israel did in the land which the LORD gave them as their possession.) 13‘Now arise and cross the valley of the Zered.’ So we crossed the Zered Valley. 14Now thirty-eight years passed from the time we left Kadesh-barnea until we crossed the Zered Valley, until that entire generation of the men of war had died from within the camp, just as the LORD had sworn to them. 15Moreover the hand of the LORD was against them, to destroy them from within the camp, until they were all dead.

16“So it came about when all the men of war had finally died from among the people, 17that the LORD spoke to me, saying, 18‘Today you are to pass through Ar, the border of Moab. 19‘When you come opposite the territory of the sons of Ammon, do not harass them nor provoke them, for I will not give you any of the land of the sons of Ammon as a possession, because I have given it to the sons of Lot as a possession.’ 20(It is also regarded as the land of the Rephaim [of giant stature], for Rephaim used to live there, but the Ammonites call them Zamzummin, 21a great, numerous people, and tall as the Anakim, but the LORD destroyed them before the sons of Ammon. And they dispossessed them and settled in their place, 22just as He did for the sons of Esau, who live in Seir, when He destroyed the Horites from before them; and the sons of Esau (the Edomites) dispossessed them and settled in their place [and remain there] even to this day. 23As for the Avvim, who lived in villages as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim (Cretans, later Philistines) who came from Caphtor (Crete) destroyed them and settled in their place.) 24‘Now arise, continue on, and go through the valley of the Arnon. Look, I have handed over to you Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Begin! Take possession [of it] and fight with him in battle. 25‘This day I will begin to put the dread and the fear of you on the peoples (pagans) under the whole heaven, who, when they hear the reports about you, will tremble and be in anguish because of you.’

26“So I sent messengers from the Wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying, 27‘Let me pass through your land [with my people]. I will travel [with them] only on the highway; I will not turn away to the right or to the left. 28‘You will sell me food for money so that I [along with my people] will eat, and you will give me water for money so that I [along with my people] will drink; only let me [and my people] travel through [the land] on foot, 29just as the sons of Esau, who live in Seir, and the Moabites, who live in Ar, did for me, until I cross the Jordan into the land which the LORD our God is giving us.’ 30But Sihon king of Heshbon was not willing for us to travel through his land; for the LORD your God hardened his spirit and made his heart obstinate, in order to hand him over to you, as he is today. 31The LORD said to me, ‘Look, I have begun to hand over to you Sihon and his land. Begin! Take possession [of it], so that you may possess his land.’

32“Then at Jahaz, Sihon and all his people came out to meet us in battle. 33So the LORD our God handed him over to us [and gave us the victory], and we defeated him and his sons and all his people. 34At the same time we took all his cities and utterly destroyed every city—men, women and children. We left no survivor. 35We took only the cattle as plunder for ourselves and the spoil of the cities which we had captured. 36From Aroer, which is on the edge of the Arnon Valley, and from the city which is in the valley, as far as Gilead, there was no city [whose wall was] too high and too strong for us; the LORD our God handed over everything to us. 37Only you did not go near the land of the sons of Ammon, all along the river Jabbok and the cities of the hill country, and wherever the LORD our God had forbidden us.

Deuteronomy 3
Conquests Recounted

1“Then we turned and went up the road toward Bashan, and at Edrei, Og king of Bashan, with all his people came out to meet us in battle. 2And the LORD said to me, ‘Do not fear him, for I have handed him over to you, him and all his people and his land; and you shall do to him just as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon.’ 3So the LORD our God also handed over Og king of Bashan, and all his people, into our hand and we struck him until no survivor was left. 4We captured all his cities at that time; there was not a city which we did not take from them: sixty cities, the whole region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 5All these cities were fortified and unassailable with their high walls, gates, and bars; in addition, [there were] a very great number of unwalled villages. 6We utterly destroyed them, just as we did to Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying every city—the men, women, and children. 7But we took all the cattle and the spoil of the cities as plunder for ourselves.

8“So we took the land at that time from the hand of the two kings [Sihon and Og] of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, from the valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon 9(the Sidonians call Hermon Sirion, and the Amorites call it Senir): 10all the cities of the plain and all Gilead and all Bashan, as far as Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.” 11(For only Og king of Bashan was left of the remnant of the [the giants known as the] Rephaim. Behold, his bed frame was a bed frame of iron; is it not in Rabbah of the Ammonites? It was nine cubits (12 ft.) long and four cubits (6 ft.) wide, using the cubit of a man [the forearm to the end of the middle finger].)

12“So we took possession of this land at that time. I gave the territory from Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon, along with half of the hill country of Gilead and its cities to the Reubenites and to the Gadites. 13The rest of Gilead and all of Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh, that is, all the region of Argob (concerning all Bashan, it is called the land of Rephaim. 14Jair the son (descendant) of Manasseh took all the region of Argob as far as the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, that is Bashan, and called it after his own name, Havvoth (the villages of) Jair, as it is called to this day.) 15I gave Gilead to Machir [of Manasseh]. 16To the Reubenites and Gadites I gave the territory from Gilead as far as the Valley of Arnon, with the middle of the Valley as a boundary, and as far as the Jabbok River, the boundary of the sons of Ammon; 17the Arabah also, with the Jordan as its boundary, from Chinnereth (the Sea of Galilee) as far as the sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea (Dead Sea), at the foot of the slopes of Pisgah on the east.

18“Then I commanded you [Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh] at that time, saying, ‘The LORD your God has given you this land to possess; all you who are brave men shall cross over [the Jordan] armed before your brothers, the sons of Israel. 19‘But your wives and your children and your cattle—I know that you have much livestock—shall remain in your cities which I have given you, 20until the LORD gives rest to your fellow countrymen as [He has] to you, and they also possess the land which the LORD your God has given them beyond the Jordan. Then each of you may return to the land (possession) which I have given to you.’ 21I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, ‘Your eyes have seen everything that the LORD your God has done to these two kings [Sihon and Og]; so the LORD shall do the same to all the kingdoms into which you are about to cross. 22‘Do not fear them, for it is the LORD your God who is fighting for you.’

23“Then I pleaded with the LORD at that time [for His favor], saying, 24‘O Lord GOD, You have only begun to show Your servant Your greatness and Your mighty hand; for what god is there in heaven or on earth that can do such works and mighty acts (miracles) as Yours? 25‘I pray, let me go over and see the good land that is beyond the Jordan, that good hill country [with Hermon] and Lebanon.’ 26But the LORD was angry with me because of you [and your rebellion at Meribah], and would not listen to me; and the LORD said to me, ‘Enough! Speak to Me no longer about this matter. 27‘Go up to the top of [Mount] Pisgah and raise your eyes toward the west and north and south and east, and see it with your eyes, for you shall not cross this Jordan. 28‘But command Joshua and encourage and strengthen him, for he shall go across and lead this people, and he will give them the land which you see as an inheritance.’ 29So we stayed in the Valley opposite Beth-peor.

Deuteronomy 4
Israel Urged To Obey God’s Law

1“Now, O Israel, listen and pay attention to the statutes and the judgments (God’s legal decisions) which I am teaching you to do, so that you may live and go in and take possession of the land which the LORD, the God of your fathers, is giving you. 2You shall not add to the word which I am commanding you, nor take away from it, so that you may keep the commandments of the LORD your God which I am commanding you. 3Your eyes have seen what the LORD did at Baal-peor; for all the men who followed [and participated in the worship of] Baal of Peor, the LORD your God destroyed them from among you, 4but you who held tightly to the LORD your God are alive today, every one of you.

5“Look, I have taught you statutes and judgments just as the LORD my God has commanded me, so that you may do them in the land which you are entering to possess. 6So keep and do them, for that is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the peoples who will hear all these statutes and say, ‘Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.’ 7For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it as the LORD our God [is to us] whenever we call on Him? 8Or what great nation has statutes and judgments so righteous (upright, just) as this whole law which I am placing before you today?

9“Only pay attention and watch yourselves closely so that you do not forget the things which your eyes have seen and they do not depart from your heart all the days of your life. Make them known to your children and your grandchildren [impressing these things on their mind and penetrating their heart with these truths]— 10especially the day you stood before the LORD your God at Horeb (Mount Sinai), when the LORD said to me, ‘Assemble the people to Me and I will let them hear My words, so that they may learn to fear Me [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect] all the days they live on the land, and so that they may teach their children.’ 11You approached and stood at the foot of the mountain, and the mountain burned with fire to the [very] heart of the heavens: darkness, cloud and thick gloom. 12Then the LORD spoke to you from the midst of the fire; you heard the sound of the words, but you saw no form—there was only a voice. 13So He declared to you His covenant which He commanded you to follow, the Ten Commandments; and He wrote them on two tablets of stone. 14The LORD commanded me at that time to teach you the statutes and judgments, so that you might do them in the land which you are going over to possess.

15“So pay attention and watch yourselves carefully—for you did not see any form [of God] on the day the LORD spoke to you at Horeb from the midst of the fire— 16so that you do not act corruptly and make for yourselves a carved or sculpted image [to worship] in the form of any figure, the likeness of male or female, 17the likeness of any animal that is on the earth, or of any winged bird that flies in the sky, 18the likeness of anything that crawls on the ground, or of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth. 19And beware that you do not raise your eyes toward heaven and see the sun and the moon and the stars, all the host of heaven, and let yourselves be led astray and worship them and serve them, [mere created bodies] which the LORD your God has allotted to [serve and benefit] all the peoples under the whole heaven. 20But the LORD has taken you and brought you out of the iron [smelting] furnace, out of Egypt, to be a people for His own possession, as [you are] this day.

21“Now the LORD was angry with me [at the waters of Meribah] because of you, and He swore [an oath] that I would not cross the Jordan, and that I would not enter the good land which the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance. 22For I am going to die in this land, I am not going to cross the Jordan, but you shall cross over and take possession of this good land. 23So be on your guard and watch yourselves, so that you do not forget the covenant of the LORD your God which He has made with you, and make for yourselves a carved or sculpted image in the form of anything which the LORD your God has forbidden you. 24For the LORD your God is a consuming fire; He is a jealous (impassioned) God [demanding what is rightfully and uniquely His].

25“When you become the father of children and grandchildren and have grown old in the land, then if you corrupt yourselves by making a carved or sculpted image in the form of anything [for the purpose of worship], and do evil [things] in the sight of the LORD your God, provoking Him to anger, 26I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you today, that you will soon utterly perish from the land which you are crossing the Jordan to possess. You shall not live long on it, but will be utterly destroyed. 27The LORD will scatter and disperse you among the peoples (pagan nations), and you will be left few in number among the nations where the LORD drives you. 28And there you will serve [false and foreign] gods, the work of human hands, [lifeless images of] wood and stone, which neither see nor hear nor eat nor smell [the offerings of food given to them]. 29But from there you will seek the LORD your God, and you will find Him if you search for Him with all your heart and all your soul. 30When you are in distress and tribulation and all these things come on you, in the latter days you will return to the LORD your God and listen to His voice. 31For the LORD your God is a merciful and compassionate God; He will not fail you, nor destroy you, nor forget the covenant with your fathers which He swore to them.

32“Indeed, ask now about the days that are past, [those days] which were before you, since the day that God created man on the earth, and ask from one end of the heavens to the other. Has anything been done like this great thing, or has anything been heard like it? 33Did [any] people ever hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as you heard, and [still] live? 34Or has any [man-made] god ever tried to go and take for himself a nation from within another nation by trials, by signs and wonders and by war and by a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm and by great terrors, as the LORD your God did for you in Egypt before your [very] eyes? 35It was shown to you so that you might have [personal] knowledge and comprehend that the LORD is God; there is no other besides Him. 36Out of the heavens He let you hear His voice to discipline and admonish you; and on earth He let you see His great fire, and you heard His words from the midst of the fire. 37And because He loved your fathers, He chose their descendants who followed them, and brought you from Egypt with His Presence, with His great and awesome power, 38dispossessing and driving out from before you nations, [nations that were] greater and mightier than you, to bring you in, to give you their land as an inheritance, as it is this day. 39Therefore know and understand today, and take it to your heart, that the LORD is God in the heavens above and on the earth below; there is no other. 40“So you shall keep His statutes and His commandments which I am commanding you today, so that it may go well with you and with your children after you, and so that you may live long on the land which the LORD your God is giving you for all time.”

41Then Moses set apart three cities [of refuge] beyond the Jordan toward the rising of the sun (eastward), 42so that someone who committed manslaughter could flee there, [that is, a person] who killed his neighbor unintentionally and without previously having hostility toward him, and that by escaping to one of these cities he might [claim the right of asylum and] save his life: 43Bezer in the wilderness on the plateau for the Reubenites, and Ramoth in Gilead for the Gadites, and Golan in Bashan for the Manassites.

44This is the law which Moses placed before the sons of Israel; 45these are the testimonies (legal provisions) and the statutes and the judgments which Moses spoke to the sons of Israel when they came out of Egypt, 46beyond the Jordan in the Valley opposite Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites who lived at Heshbon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel defeated when they came out from Egypt. 47They took possession of his land and the land of Og king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, who reigned across the Jordan to the east, 48from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the [river] Arnon, as far as Mount Sion (that is, Hermon), 49with all the Arabah (desert lowlands) across the Jordan to the east, even as far as the sea of the Arabah (the Dead Sea), at the foot of the slopes of Pisgah.

Deuteronomy 5
The Ten Commandments Repeated

1Then Moses summoned all Israel and said to them:

“Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments (legal decisions) which I am speaking today in your hearing, so that you may learn them and observe them carefully. 2The LORD our God made a covenant with us at Horeb. 3The LORD did not make this covenant with our fathers, but with us, all of us who are alive here today. 4The LORD spoke with you face to face at the mountain from the midst of the fire. 5I was standing between the LORD and you at that time, to declare to you the word of the LORD; for you were afraid because of the fire and did not go up the mountain. He said,

6‘I am the LORD your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.

7‘You shall have no other gods before Me.

8‘You shall not make for yourself an idol [as an object to worship], or any likeness (form, manifestation) of what is in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the water under the earth. 9‘You shall not worship them or serve them; for I, the LORD your God, am a jealous (impassioned) God [demanding what is rightfully and uniquely mine], visiting (avenging) the iniquity (sin, guilt) of the fathers on the children [that is, calling the children to account for the sins of their fathers], to the third and the fourth generations of those who hate Me, 10but showing graciousness and lovingkindness to thousands [of generations] of those who love Me and keep My commandments.

11‘You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain [that is, irreverently, in false affirmations or in ways that impugn the character of God]; for the LORD will not hold guiltless nor leave unpunished the one who takes His name in vain [disregarding its reverence and its power].

12‘Observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy (set apart, dedicated to God), as the LORD your God commanded you. 13‘Six days you shall labor and do all your work, 14but the seventh day is a Sabbath [a day of rest dedicated] to the LORD your God; on that day you shall not do any work, you or your son or your daughter or your male servant or your female servant or your ox or your donkey or any of your livestock or the stranger who stays inside your [city] gates, so that your male servant and your female servant may rest as well as you. 15‘You shall remember [with thoughtful concern] that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and that the LORD your God brought you out of there with a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm; therefore the LORD your God has commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.

16‘Honor (respect, obey, care for) your father and your mother, as the LORD your God has commanded you, so that your days [on the earth] may be prolonged and so that it may go well with you in the land which the LORD your God gives you.

17‘You shall not murder.

18‘You shall not commit adultery.

19‘You shall not steal.

20‘You shall not give false testimony [that is, lie, withhold, or manipulate the truth] against your neighbor (any person).

21‘You shall not covet [that is, desire and seek to acquire] your neighbor’s wife, nor desire your neighbor’s house, his field, his male servant or his female servant, his ox or his donkey or anything that belongs to your neighbor.’

Moses Interceded 22“The LORD spoke these words with a great voice to all your assembly at the mountain out of the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the thick darkness, and He added no more. He wrote these commandments on two tablets of stone and gave them to me. 23And when you heard the voice from the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, you approached me, all the leaders (heads) of your tribes and your elders; 24and you said, ‘Behold, the LORD our God has shown us His glory and His greatness, and we have heard His voice from the midst of the fire; we have seen today that God speaks with man, yet he [still] lives. 25‘Now then why should we die? For this great fire will consume us; if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any longer, then we will die. 26‘For who is there of all flesh (mankind) who has heard the voice of the living God speaking from the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived? 27‘You, Moses, go near and listen to everything that the LORD our God says; then speak to us everything that the LORD our God speaks to you, and we will listen and do it.’

28“The LORD heard your words when you spoke to me, and the LORD said to me, ‘I have heard the words of this people which they have spoken to you. They have done well in all that they have spoken. 29‘Oh that they had such a heart in them, that they would fear [and worship Me with awe-filled reverence and profound respect] and keep all My commandments always, so that it may go well with them and with their children forever! 30‘Go and say to them, “Return to your tents.” 31‘But as for you, stand here by Me, and I will tell you all the commandments and the statutes and the judgments which you shall teach them, so that they may obey them in the land which I give them to possess.’ 32Therefore you shall pay attention and be careful to do just as the LORD your God has commanded you; you shall not turn aside to the right or to the left [deviating from My commandments]. 33You shall walk [that is, live each and every day] in all the ways which the LORD your God has commanded you, so that you may live and so that it may be well with you, and that you may live long in the land which you will possess.

Deuteronomy 6
Obey God And Prosper

1“Now this is the command; the statutes and the judgments (precepts) which the LORD your God has commanded me to teach you, so that you might do (follow, obey) them in the land which you are crossing over [the Jordan] to possess, 2so that you and your son and your grandson may fear and worship the LORD your God [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect], to keep [and actively do] all His statutes and His commandments which I am commanding you, all the days of your life, so that your days may be prolonged. 3Therefore listen, O Israel, and be careful to do them, that it may go well with you and that you may increase greatly [in numbers], as the LORD, the God of your fathers, has promised you, in a land flowing with milk and honey.

4“Hear, O Israel! The LORD is our God, the LORD is one [the only God]! 5You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and mind and with all your soul and with all your strength [your entire being]. 6These words, which I am commanding you today, shall be [written] on your heart and mind. 7You shall teach them diligently to your children [impressing God’s precepts on their minds and penetrating their hearts with His truths] and shall speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up. 8And you shall bind them as a sign on your hand (forearm), and they shall be used as bands (frontals, frontlets) on your forehead. 9You shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.

10“Then it shall come about when the LORD your God brings you into the land which He swore (solemnly promised) to [give] your fathers—to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—to give you, [a land with] great and splendid cities which you did not build, 11and houses full of all good things which you did not fill, and hewn (excavated) cisterns (wells) which you did not dig out, and vineyards and olive trees which you did not plant, and you eat and are full and satisfied, 12then beware that you do not forget the LORD who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 13You shall fear [only] the LORD your God; and you shall serve Him [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect] and swear [oaths] by His name [alone]. 14You shall not follow other gods, any of the gods of the peoples who surround you, 15for the LORD your God who is among you is a jealous (impassioned) God [demanding what is rightfully and uniquely His]—otherwise the anger of the LORD your God will be kindled and burn against you, and He will destroy you from the face of the earth.

16“You shall not put the LORD your God to the test, as you tested Him at Massah. 17You shall diligently keep [foremost in your thoughts and actively do] the commandments of the LORD your God, and His testimonies and His statutes which He has commanded you. 18You shall do what is right and good in the sight of the LORD, so that it may be well with you and that you may go in and possess the good land which the LORD swore to [give] your fathers, 19by driving out all your enemies from before you, as the LORD has spoken.

20“When your son asks you in time to come, saying, ‘What is the meaning of the testimonies and statutes and judgments (precepts) which the LORD our God has commanded you?’ 21then you shall say to your son, ‘We were Pharaoh’s slaves in Egypt, and the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 22‘Moreover, the LORD showed great and terrible signs and wonders before our eyes against Egypt, Pharaoh and all his household; 23He brought us out from there in order to bring us in, to give us the land which He had sworn to [give] our fathers.’ 24So the LORD commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear [and worship] the LORD our God [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect] for our good always and so that He might preserve us alive, as it is today. 25It will be [considered] righteousness for us [that is, right standing with God] if we are careful to observe all this commandment before the LORD our God—just as He has commanded us.

Deuteronomy 7
Warnings

1“When the LORD your God brings you into the land which you are entering to possess, and has cleared away many nations before you, the Hittite and the Girgashite and the Amorite and the Canaanite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, seven nations greater and mightier than you, 2and when the LORD your God gives them over to you and you defeat them, then you shall utterly destroy them. You shall not make a covenant (treaty) with them nor show mercy and compassion to them. 3You shall not intermarry with them; you shall not give your daughter to his son, nor shall you take his daughter for your son; 4for they will turn your sons away from following Me to serve other gods; then the anger of the LORD will be kindled and burn against you and He will quickly destroy you. 5But this is how you shall deal with them: you shall tear down their altars and smash to pieces their sacred pillars, and cut down their Asherim (symbols of the goddess Asherah), and burn their carved or sculpted images in the fire. 6For you are a holy people [set apart] to the LORD your God; the LORD your God has chosen you out of all the peoples on the face of the earth to be a people for His own possession [that is, His very special treasure].

7“The LORD did not love you and choose you because you were greater in number than any of the other peoples, for you were the fewest of all peoples. 8But because the LORD loves you and is keeping the oath which He swore to your fathers, the LORD has brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed (bought) you from the house of slavery, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. 9Therefore know [without any doubt] and understand that the LORD your God, He is God, the faithful God, who is keeping His covenant and His [steadfast] lovingkindness to a thousand generations with those who love Him and keep His commandments; 10but repays those who hate Him to their faces, by destroying them; He will not hesitate with him who hates Him, He will repay him to his face. 11Therefore, you shall keep (follow, obey) the commandment and the statutes and judgments (precepts) which I am commanding you today.

Promises of God 12“Then it shall come about, because you listen to these judgments and keep and do them, that the LORD your God will keep with you the covenant and the [steadfast] lovingkindness which He swore to your fathers. 13He will love you and bless you and multiply you; He will also bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your land, your grain and your new wine and your [olive] oil, the offspring of your cattle and the young of your flock, in the land which He swore to your fathers to give you. 14You shall be blessed above all peoples; there will be no male or female barren (childless, infertile) among you or among your cattle. 15The LORD will take away from you all sickness; and He will not subject you to any of the harmful diseases of Egypt which you have known, but He will impose them on all [those] who hate you. 16And you shall consume all the peoples whom the LORD your God will give over to you; your eye shall not pity them, nor shall you serve their gods, for that would be a [deadly] trap to you.

17“If you say in your heart, ‘These nations are greater than I am; how can I dispossess them?’ 18you shall not be afraid of them; you shall remember [with confidence] what the LORD your God did to Pharaoh and to all Egypt— 19the great trials which you saw with your own eyes, and the signs, the wonders, the mighty hand and the outstretched arm by which the LORD your God brought you out. So shall the LORD your God do to all the peoples of whom you are afraid. 20Moreover, the LORD your God will send the hornet (His terror) against them, until those who are left and hide themselves from you perish. 21You shall not dread them, for the LORD your God is in your midst, a great and awesome God. 22The LORD your God will clear away these nations before you little by little; you will not be able to put an end to them quickly, for [if you did] the wild animals would become too numerous for you. 23But the LORD your God will hand them over to you, and will confuse them with a great panic until they are destroyed. 24And He will hand over their kings to you, and you will make their name perish from under heaven; no man will be able to stand before you until you have destroyed them. 25You shall burn the carved and sculpted images of their gods in the fire. You shall not covet the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it for yourselves, so that you will not be ensnared by it [in a deadly trap], for it is an abomination (repulsive) to the LORD your God. 26You shall not bring an abomination (idol) into your house, and like it come under the ban (doomed to destruction); you shall utterly detest and you shall utterly hate it, for it is something banned.
Deuteronomy 8
God’s Gracious Dealings

1“Every commandment that I am commanding you today you shall be careful to do, so that you may live and multiply, and go in and possess the land which the LORD swore [to give] to your fathers. 2And you shall remember [always] all the ways which the LORD your God has led you these forty years in the wilderness, so that He might humble you and test you, to know what was in your heart (mind), whether you would keep His commandments or not. 3He humbled you and allowed you to be hungry and fed you with manna, [a substance] which you did not know, nor did your fathers know, so that He might make you understand [by personal experience] that man does not live by bread alone, but man lives by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the LORD. 4Your clothing did not wear out on you, nor did your feet swell these forty years. 5Therefore, know in your heart (be fully cognizant) that the LORD your God disciplines and instructs you just as a man disciplines and instructs his son. 6Therefore, you shall keep the commandments of the LORD your God, to walk [that is, to live each and every day] in His ways and fear [and worship] Him [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect]. 7For the LORD your God is bringing you into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and springs, flowing forth in valleys and hills; 8a land of wheat and barley, and vines and fig trees and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey; 9a land where you will eat bread without shortage, in which you will lack nothing; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills you can dig copper. 10When you have eaten and are satisfied, then you shall bless the LORD your God for the good land which He has given you.

11“Beware that you do not forget the LORD your God by failing to keep His commandments and His judgments (precepts) and His statutes which I am commanding you today; 12otherwise, when you have eaten and are satisfied, and have built good houses and lived in them, 13and when your herds and flocks multiply, and your silver and gold multiply, and all that you have increases, 14then your heart will become lifted up [by self-conceit and arrogance] and you will forget the LORD your God who brought you from the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. 15He led you through the great and terrible wilderness, with its fiery serpents and scorpions and thirsty ground where there was no water; it was He who brought water for you out of the flinty rock. 16He fed you manna in the wilderness, [a substance] which your fathers did not know, so that He might humble you [by dependence on Him] and that He might test you, to do good [things] for you at the end. 17Otherwise, you may say in your heart, ‘My power and the strength of my hand made me this wealth.’ 18But you shall remember [with profound respect] the LORD your God, for it is He who is giving you power to make wealth, that He may confirm His covenant which He swore (solemnly promised) to your fathers, as it is this day. 19And it shall come about if you ever forget the LORD your God and follow other gods and serve them and worship them, I testify against you today that you will most certainly perish. 20Like the nations which the LORD causes to perish before you, so shall you perish; because you would not listen to and obey the voice of the LORD your God.

Deuteronomy 9
Israel Provoked God

1“Hear, O Israel! You are crossing the Jordan today to go in to dispossess nations greater and more powerful than you, great cities fortified to heaven, 2a people great and tall, sons of Anakim, whom you know and of whom you have heard it said, ‘Who can stand before the sons of Anak?’ 3So know today [with confident assurance] that the LORD your God is crossing [the Jordan] before you like a devouring fire. He will destroy them and He will subdue them before you, and you shall drive them out and destroy them quickly, just as the LORD has promised you.

4“Do not say in your heart when the LORD your God has driven them out before you, ‘Because of my righteousness the LORD has brought me in to possess this land,’ but because of the wickedness of these nations the LORD is dispossessing them before you. 5It is not for your righteousness or for the uprightness of your heart that you are going to possess their land, but because of the wickedness of these nations the LORD your God is driving them out before you, and to confirm the oath which the LORD swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

6“Know [without any doubt], that the LORD your God is not giving you this good land to possess because of your righteousness, for you are a stiff-necked (stubborn, obstinate) people. 7Remember [with remorse] and do not forget how you provoked the LORD your God to wrath in the wilderness; from the day you left the land of Egypt until you arrived in this place, you have been rebellious against the LORD. 8And at Horeb (Sinai) you provoked the LORD to wrath, and the LORD was so angry with you that He would have destroyed you. 9When I went up the mountain to receive the tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant which the LORD made with you, I remained on the mountain forty days and forty nights; I did not eat food or drink water. 10The LORD gave me the two tablets of stone written with the finger of God; and on them were written all the words which the LORD had spoken to you at the mountain from the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly. 11It came about at the end of forty days and forty nights that the LORD gave me the two tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant. 12Then the LORD said to me, ‘Arise, go down from here quickly, for your people whom you brought from Egypt have acted corruptly. They have quickly turned aside from the way which I commanded them; they have made (cast) a molten image for themselves.’ 13Furthermore, the LORD said to me, ‘I have seen this people, and indeed, they are stiff-necked (stubborn, obstinate) people. 14‘Let Me alone, so that I may destroy them and wipe out their name from under heaven; and I will make of you a nation mightier and greater than they.’

15“So I turned and came down from the mountain while the mountain was burning with fire, and the two tablets of the covenant were in my two hands. 16And I saw that you had indeed sinned against the LORD your God. You had made for yourselves a molten calf (idol). You had turned aside quickly from the way which the LORD had commanded you. 17So I took hold of the two tablets and threw them from my two hands and smashed them before your very eyes! 18Then, as before, I fell down before the LORD for [another] forty days and forty nights; I did not eat food or drink water, because of all the sin you had committed by doing what was evil in the sight of the LORD to provoke Him to anger. 19For I was afraid of the anger and absolute fury which the LORD held against you, [enough divine fury] to destroy you, but the LORD listened to me that time also. 20The LORD was very angry with Aaron, angry [enough] to destroy him, so I also prayed for Aaron at the same time. 21I took your sinful thing, the calf which you had made, and burned it in the fire and thoroughly crushed it, grinding the metal thoroughly until it was as fine as dust; and I threw its dust into the brook that came down from the mountain.

22“At Taberah also and at Massah and at Kibroth-hattaavah you provoked the LORD to wrath. 23And when the LORD sent you from Kadesh-barnea, saying, ‘Go up and take possession of the land which I have given you,’ then you rebelled against the command of the LORD your God, and you did not believe and rely on Him, nor did you obey His voice. 24You have been rebellious against the LORD from the [first] day that I knew you.

25“So I fell down and lay face down before the LORD forty days and nights because the LORD had said He would destroy you. 26Then I prayed to the LORD and said, ‘O Lord GOD, do not destroy Your people, even Your inheritance, whom You have redeemed through Your greatness, whom You have brought from Egypt with a mighty hand. 27‘Remember [with compassion] Your servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; do not look at the stubbornness of this people or at their wickedness or at their sin, 28so that the [people of the] land from which You brought us will not say, “Because the LORD was not capable of bringing them into the land which He had promised them and because He hated them He has brought them out to the wilderness [in order] to kill them.” 29‘Yet they are Your people and Your inheritance, whom You have brought out by Your great power and by Your outstretched arm.’

Deuteronomy 10
The Tablets Rewritten

1“At that time the LORD said to me, ‘Cut out for yourself two tablets of stone like the first, and come up to Me on the mountain, and make an ark (chest) of wood for yourself. 2‘I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets which you shattered, and you shall put them in the ark.’ 3So I made an ark of acacia wood and cut out two tablets of stone like the first, and went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hand. 4The LORD wrote on the tablets, like the first writing, the Ten Commandments which the LORD had spoken to you on the mountain from the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly; then the LORD gave them to me. 5“Then I turned and came down from the mountain and put the tablets in the ark which I had made; and they are there, just as the LORD commanded me.”

6(Now the sons of Israel traveled from the wells of the sons of Jaakan to Moserah. There Aaron died and there he was buried and Eleazar his son ministered as priest in his place. 7From there they traveled to Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of brooks of water. 8At that time the LORD set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to serve Him and to bless in His name until this day. 9Therefore, Levi does not have a portion or inheritance [of tribal land] with his brothers; the LORD is his inheritance, as the LORD your God has promised him.)

10“And I stayed on the mountain, like the first time, forty days and nights, and the LORD listened to me at that time also; the LORD was not willing to destroy you. 11Then the LORD said to me, ‘Arise, go on your journey ahead of the people, so that they may go in and take possession of the land which I swore to their fathers to give to them.’

12“And now, Israel, what does the LORD your God require from you, but to fear [and worship] the LORD your God [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect], to walk [that is, to live each and every day] in all His ways and to love Him, and to serve the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul [your choices, your thoughts, your whole being], 13and to keep the commandments of the LORD and His statutes which I am commanding you today for your good? 14Behold, the heavens and the highest of heavens belong to the LORD your God, the earth and all that is in it. 15Yet the LORD had a delight in loving your fathers and set His affection on them, and He chose their descendants after them, you above all peoples, as it is this day. 16So circumcise [that is, remove sin from] your heart, and be stiff-necked (stubborn, obstinate) no longer. 17For the LORD your God is the God of gods and the Lord of lords, the great, the mighty, the awesome God who does not show partiality nor take a bribe. 18He executes justice for the orphan and the widow, and shows His love for the stranger (resident alien, foreigner) by giving him food and clothing. 19Therefore, show your love for the stranger, for you were strangers in the land of Egypt. 20You shall fear [and worship] the LORD your God [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect]; you shall serve Him and cling to Him [hold tightly to Him, be united with Him], and you shall swear [oaths] by His name. 21He is your praise and glory; He is your God, who has done for you these great and awesome things which you have seen with your own eyes. 22Your fathers went down to Egypt, seventy persons [in all], and now the LORD your God has made you as numerous as the stars of heaven.

Deuteronomy 11
Rewards Of Obedience

1“Therefore you shall love the LORD your God, and always keep His charge, His statutes, His precepts, and His commandments [it is your obligation to Him]. 2Know this day that I am not speaking to your children who have not known [by personal experience] and who have not seen [firsthand] the instruction and discipline of the LORD your God—His greatness, His mighty hand and His outstretched arm; 3and His signs and His works which He did in the midst of Egypt to Pharaoh the king of Egypt and to all his land; 4and what He did to the army of Egypt, to its horses and its chariots, when He made the water of the Red Sea engulf them as they pursued you, and how the LORD completely destroyed them; 5and what He did to you in the wilderness until you came to this place; 6and what He did to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben, when the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them, their households, their tents, and every living thing that followed them, in the midst of all Israel. 7For your eyes have seen all the great work of the LORD which He did.

8“Therefore, you shall keep all the commandments which I am commanding you today, so that you may be strong and go in and take possession of the land which you are crossing over [the Jordan] to possess; 9so that you may live long on the land which the LORD swore (solemnly promised) to your fathers to give to them and to their descendants, a land [of great abundance,] flowing with milk and honey. 10For the land which you are entering to possess is not like the land of Egypt from which you have come, where you sowed your seed and watered it with your foot like a garden of vegetables. 11But the land into which you are about to cross to possess, a land of hills and valleys, drinks water from the rain of heaven, 12a land for which the LORD your God cares; the eyes of the LORD your God are always on it, from the beginning of the year to the end of the year.

13“It shall come about, if you listen obediently and pay attention to My commandments which I command you today—to love the LORD your God and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul [your choices, your thoughts, your whole being]— 14that He will give the rain for your land in its season, the early [fall] rain and the late [spring] rain, so that you may gather in your grain and your new wine and your [olive] oil. 15And He will give grass in your fields for your cattle, and you will eat and be satisfied. 16Beware that your hearts are not deceived, and that you do not turn away [from the LORD] and serve other gods and worship them, 17or [else] the LORD’S anger will be kindled and burn against you, and He will shut up the heavens so that there will be no rain and the land will not yield its fruit; and you will perish quickly from the good land which the LORD is giving you.

18“Therefore, you shall impress these words of mine on your heart and on your soul, and tie them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be as bands (frontals, frontlets) on your forehead. 19You shall teach them [diligently] to your children [impressing God’s precepts on their minds and penetrating their hearts with His truths], speaking of them when you sit in your house and when you walk along the road and when you lie down and when you rise up. 20You shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates, 21so that your days and the days of your children may be multiplied in the land which the LORD swore to your fathers to give them, as long as the heavens are above the earth. 22For if you are careful to keep all this commandment which I am commanding you to do, to love the LORD your God, to walk [that is, to live each and every day] in all His ways and to hold tightly to Him— 23then the LORD will drive out all these nations from before you, and you shall dispossess nations greater and mightier than you. 24Every place on which the sole of your foot treads shall become yours; your territory shall be from the wilderness to Lebanon, and from the river, the river Euphrates, as far as the western sea (the Mediterranean). 25No man will be able to stand before you; the LORD your God will lay the fear and the dread of you on all the land on which you set foot, just as He has spoken to you.

26“Behold, today I am setting before you a blessing and a curse— 27the blessing, if you listen to and obey the commandments of the LORD your God, which I am commanding you today; 28and the curse, if you do not listen to and obey the commandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside from the way which I am commanding you today, by following (acknowledging, worshiping) other gods which you have not known.

29“It shall come about, when the LORD your God brings you into the land which you are entering to possess, that you shall place the blessing on Mount Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal. 30Are they not across the Jordan, west of the road, toward the sunset, in the land of the Canaanites who live in the Arabah, opposite Gilgal, beside the oaks of Moreh? 31For you are about to cross the Jordan to go in to possess the land which the LORD your God is giving you, and you shall possess it and live in it, 32and you shall be careful to do all the statutes and the judgments which I am setting before you today.

Deuteronomy 12
Laws Of The Sanctuary

1“These are the statutes and judgments (precepts) which you shall be careful to do in the land which the LORD, the God of your fathers, has given you to possess as long as you live on the earth. 2You shall utterly destroy all the places where the nations whom you shall dispossess serve their gods, on the high mountains and the hills and under every green [leafy] tree. 3You shall tear down their altars and smash their [idolatrous] pillars and burn their Asherim in the fire; you shall cut down the carved and sculpted images of their gods and obliterate their name from that place. 4You shall not act like this toward the LORD your God. 5But you shall seek the LORD at the place which the LORD your God will choose out of all your tribes to establish His Name there for His dwelling [place], and there you shall come [to worship Him]. 6There you shall bring your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contribution of your hand, your votive (pledged, vowed) offerings, your freewill (voluntary) offerings, and the firstborn of your herd and of your flock. 7And there you and your households shall eat before the LORD your God, and rejoice in all to which you put your hand, in which the LORD your God has blessed you.

8“You shall not do at all what we are doing here [in the camp] today, every man doing whatever is right in his [own] eyes. 9For you have not yet come to the resting place and to the inheritance which the LORD your God is giving you. 10When you cross the Jordan and live in the land which the LORD your God is giving you to inherit, and He gives you rest from all your enemies around you so that you live in security, 11then it shall come about that the place which the LORD your God will choose for His Name [and Presence] to dwell; there you shall bring everything that I am commanding you: your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes and the [voluntary] contribution of your hand [as a first gift from the fruits of the ground], and all your choice votive offerings which you vow to the LORD. 12And you shall rejoice before the LORD your God, you and your sons and your daughters, and your male and female servants, and the Levite who is within your [city] gates, since he has no portion or inheritance with you.

13“Be careful that you do not offer your burnt offerings in every [cultic] place you see, 14but [only] in the place which the LORD will choose in one of your tribes, there you shall offer your burnt offerings, and there you shall do everything that I am commanding you.

15“However, you may slaughter and eat meat within any of your [city] gates, whatever you wish, according to the blessing of the LORD your God which He has given you [as His generous provision for daily life]. The [ceremonially] unclean and the clean may eat it, such as the gazelle and the deer. 16Only you shall not eat the blood; you are to pour it out on the ground like water. 17You are forbidden to eat within your [city] gates the tithe of your grain or new wine or oil, or the firstborn of your herd or flock, or any of your votive offerings, or your freewill offerings, or the contribution of your hand. 18But you shall eat them before the LORD your God in the place which the LORD your God will choose, you and your son and your daughter, and your male and female servants, and the Levite who is within your [city] gates; and you shall rejoice before the LORD your God in all that you undertake. 19Be careful that you do not neglect the Levite [who serves God] as long as you live in your land.

20“When the LORD your God extends your territory, as He promised you, and you say, ‘I will eat meat,’ because you want to eat meat, then you may eat meat, whatever you wish. 21If the place which the LORD your God chooses to put His Name (Presence) is too far away from you, then you may slaughter [animals] from your herd or flock which the LORD has given you, just as I have commanded you; and you may eat within your [city] gates whatever you wish. 22Just as the gazelle or the deer is eaten, so you may eat it [but not make it an offering]; the [ceremonially] unclean and the clean alike may eat it. 23Only be sure that you do not eat the blood, for the blood is the life (soul), and you shall not eat the life with the meat. 24You shall not eat it; you shall pour it out on the ground like water. 25You shall not eat it, so that all may be well with you and with your children after you, because you will be doing what is right in the sight of the LORD. 26However, you shall take your holy things which you have [to offer] and your votive (pledged, vowed) offerings, you shall take them and go to the place which the LORD will choose. 27And you shall offer your burnt offerings, the meat and the blood, on the altar of the LORD your God; and the blood of your sacrifices shall be poured out on the altar of the LORD your God, and you shall eat the meat.

28“Be careful to listen to all these words which I am commanding you, so that it may be well with you and with your children after you forever, because you will be doing what is good and right in the sight of the LORD your God.

29“When the LORD your God cuts off and destroys before you the nations which you are going in to dispossess, and you dispossess them and settle in their land, 30beware that you are not lured (ensnared) into following them, after they have been destroyed before you, and that you do not inquire about their gods, saying, ‘How did these nations serve their gods, so that I too may do likewise?’ 31You shall not behave this way toward the LORD your God, for they have done for their gods every repulsive thing which the LORD hates; for they even burn their sons and their daughters in the fire [as sacrifices] to their gods.

32“Everything I command you, you shall be careful to do it; you shall not add to it nor take away from it.

Deuteronomy 13
Shun Idolatry

1“If a prophet arises among you, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives you a sign or a wonder, 2and the sign or the wonder which he spoke (foretold) to you comes to pass, and if he says, ‘Let us follow after other gods (whom you have not known) and let us serve and worship them,’ 3you shall not listen to the words of that prophet or that dreamer of dreams; for the LORD your God is testing you to know whether you love the LORD your God with all your heart and mind and all your soul [your entire being]. 4You shall walk after the LORD your God and you shall fear [and worship] Him [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect], and you shall keep His commandments and you shall listen to His voice, and you shall serve Him, and cling to Him. 5But that prophet or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because he has counseled rebellion against the LORD your God who brought you from the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery, to draw you away from the way in which the LORD your God has commanded you to walk. So you shall remove the evil from among you.

6“If your brother, the son of your mother, or your son or daughter, or the wife you cherish, or your friend who is as [precious to you as] your own life (soul), entices you secretly, saying, ‘Let us go and serve other gods’ (gods whom neither you nor your fathers have known, 7of the gods of the peoples who are around you, near you or far from you, from one end of the earth to the other), 8you shall not consent to him or listen to him; and your eye shall not pity him, nor shall you spare him or conceal him. 9Instead, you shall most certainly execute him; your hand shall be first [to be raised] against him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people. 10So you shall stone him to death with stones, because he has tried to draw you away from the LORD your God who brought you from the land of Egypt, from the house of slavery. 11Then all Israel will hear and be afraid, and will never again do such a wicked thing among you.

12“If you hear [it said] in one of your cities, which the LORD your God gives you to live in, 13that some worthless and evil men have gone out from among you and have tempted the inhabitants of their city [to sin], saying, ‘Let us go and serve other gods’ (whom you have not known), 14then you shall investigate and search out [witnesses] and ask thorough questions. If it is true and the matter is established that this loathsome thing has been done among you, 15you shall most certainly strike the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying it and all that is in it, even its livestock with the edge of the sword. 16Then you shall collect all its spoil (plunder) into the middle of its open square and burn the city and set fire to the spoil as a whole burnt offering to the LORD your God. It shall be a ruin forever. It shall not be built again. 17Nothing from that which is put under the ban (designated for destruction) shall cling to your hand, so that the LORD may turn away from His burning anger and show mercy to you, and have compassion on you and make you increase, just as He swore to your fathers, 18because you have listened to and obeyed the voice of the LORD your God, keeping all His commandments which I am commanding you today, and doing what is right in the eyes of the LORD your God.

Deuteronomy 14
Clean And Unclean Animals

1“You are the sons of the LORD your God; you shall not cut yourselves nor shave your forehead for the sake of the dead, 2for you are a holy people [set apart] to the LORD your God; and the LORD has chosen you out of all the peoples who are on the earth to be a people for His own possession.

3“You shall not eat anything that is detestable [to the LORD and forbidden by Him]. 4These are the animals that you may eat: the ox, the sheep, the goat, 5the deer, the gazelle, the roebuck, the wild goat, the ibex, the antelope and the mountain sheep. 6Among the animals, you may eat any animal that has the divided hoof [that is, a hoof] split into two parts [especially at its distal extremity] and that chews the cud. 7However, you are not to eat any of these [animals] among those which chew the cud, or among those that divide the hoof in two: the camel, the hare and the shaphan, for though they chew the cud, they do not split the hoof; they are unclean for you. 8The swine, because it has a divided hoof but does not chew the cud; it is unclean for you. You shall not eat their meat nor touch their carcasses.

9“Of all [creatures] that are in the waters, you may eat these: anything that has fins and scales you may eat, 10but you may not eat anything that does not have fins and scales; it is unclean for you.

11“You may eat any clean bird. 12But these are the ones which you shall not eat: the eagle, the vulture, and the black buzzard, 13and the red kite, the falcon, and the birds of prey of any variety, 14and every raven of any variety, 15and the ostrich, the owl, the seagull, the hawk of any variety, 16the little owl, the great owl, the long-eared owl, 17the pelican, the carrion vulture, the cormorant, 18the stork, and the heron of any variety, and the hoopoe, and the bat. 19And all flying insects are unclean for you; they shall not be eaten. 20You may eat any clean bird.

21“You shall not eat anything that dies on its own. You may give it to the stranger (resident alien, foreigner) who is in your [city] gates, so that he may eat it, or you may sell it to a foreigner [since they are not under God’s law], but you are a people holy (set apart) to the LORD your God. You shall not boil a young goat or a lamb in its mother’s milk.

22“Every year you shall certainly tithe [a tenth] of all the yield of your seed which is produced by your field. 23You shall eat the tithe (tenth) of your grain, your new wine, your oil, and the firstborn of your herd and your flock before the LORD your God in the place where He chooses to establish His Name (Presence), so that you may learn to fear [and worship] the LORD your God [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect] always. 24If the place where the LORD your God chooses to set His Name (Presence) is a great distance from you and you are not able to carry your tithe, because the LORD your God has blessed you [with such an abundance], 25then you shall exchange your tithe for money, and take the money in your hand and go to the place [of worship] which the LORD your God chooses. 26You may spend the money for anything your heart desires: for oxen, or sheep, or wine, or [other] strong drink, or anything else you want. You shall eat there in the presence of the LORD your God and rejoice, you and your household. 27Also you shall not neglect the Levite who is within your [city] gates, for he does not have a share [of land] or an inheritance among you.

28“At the end of every third year you shall bring out all the tithe of your produce for that year, and shall store it up within your [city] gates. 29The Levite, because he has no share [of land] or an inheritance among you, and the stranger, and the orphan and the widow who are within your [city] gates, shall come and eat and be satisfied, so that the LORD your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.

Deuteronomy 15
The Sabbatical Year

1“At the end of every seven years you shall grant a release (remission, pardon) from debt. 2This is the regulation for the release: every creditor shall forgive what he has loaned to his neighbor; he shall not require repayment from his neighbor and his brother, because the LORD’S release has been proclaimed. 3You may require repayment from a foreigner, but whatever of yours is with your brother [Israelite] your hand shall release. 4However, there will be no poor among you, since the LORD will most certainly bless you in the land which the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance to possess, 5if only you will listen to and obey the voice of the LORD your God, to observe carefully all these commandments which I am commanding you today. 6When the LORD your God blesses you as He has promised you, then you will lend to many nations, but you will not borrow; and you will rule over many nations, but they will not rule over you.

7“If there is a poor man among you, one of your fellow Israelites, in any of your cities in the land that the LORD your God is giving you, you shall not be heartless, nor close-fisted with your poor brother; 8but you shall freely open your hand to him, and shall generously lend to him whatever he needs. 9Beware that there is no wicked thought in your heart, saying, ‘The seventh year, the year of release (remission, pardon), is approaching,’ and your eye is hostile (unsympathetic) toward your poor brother, and you give him nothing [since he would not have to repay you]; for he may cry out to the LORD against you, and it will become a sin for you. 10You shall freely and generously give to him, and your heart shall not be resentful when you give to him, because for this [generous] thing the LORD your God will bless you in all your work and in all your undertakings. 11For the poor will never cease to be in the land; therefore I command you, saying, ‘You shall freely open your hand to your brother, to your needy, and to your poor in your land.’

12“If your fellow Israelite, a Hebrew man or woman, is sold to you, and serves you for six years, then in the seventh year you shall set him free [from your service]. 13When you set him free, you shall not let him go away empty-handed. 14You shall give him generous provisions from your flock, from your threshing floor and from your wine press; you shall give to him as the LORD your God has blessed you. 15And you shall remember and thoughtfully consider that you were [once] a slave in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God redeemed you; therefore, I am commanding you these things today. 16Now if the servant says to you, ‘I will not leave you,’ because he loves you and your household, since he is doing well with you; 17then take an awl and pierce it through his ear into the door, and he shall [willingly] be your servant always. Also you shall do the same for your maidservant.

18“It shall not seem hard to you when you set him free, for he has served you six years with double the service of a hired man; so the LORD your God will bless you in everything you do.

19“You shall consecrate (set apart) to the LORD your God all the firstborn males that are born of your herd and flock. You shall not work with the firstborn of your herd, nor shear the firstborn of your flock. 20You and your household shall eat it every year before the LORD your God in the place [for worship] which the LORD chooses. 21But if it has any defect or injury, such as lameness or blindness, or any serious defect, you shall not sacrifice it to the LORD your God. 22You shall eat it within your [city] gates; the [ceremonially] unclean and the clean alike may eat it, as [if it were] a gazelle or a deer. 23Only you shall not eat its blood; you are to pour it out on the ground like water.

Deuteronomy 16
The Feast Of Passover

1“Observe the month of Abib and celebrate the Passover to the LORD your God, for in the month of Abib the LORD your God brought you out of Egypt by night. 2You shall sacrifice the Passover [lamb] to the LORD your God from the flock or the herd, in the place where the LORD chooses to establish His Name (Presence). 3You shall not eat leavened bread with it; instead, for seven days you shall eat the Passover with unleavened bread, the bread of affliction (for you left the land of Egypt in haste); [do this] so that all the days of your life you may remember [thoughtfully] the day when you came out of the land of Egypt. 4For seven days no leaven shall be seen with you in all your territory, and none of the meat which you sacrificed the evening of the first day shall remain overnight until morning. 5You are not allowed to sacrifice the Passover [lamb] in any of your cities which the LORD your God is giving you; 6but at the place where the LORD your God chooses to establish His Name (Presence), you shall sacrifice the Passover [lamb] in the evening at sunset, at the time that you came out of Egypt. 7You shall cook and eat it in the place which the LORD your God chooses. In the morning you are to return to your tents. 8For six days you shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be a celebration to the LORD your God; so you shall do no work [on that day].

The Feast of Weeks 9“You shall count seven weeks for yourself; you shall begin to count seven weeks from the time you first put the sickle to the standing grain. 10Then you shall celebrate the Feast of Weeks to the LORD your God with a tribute of a freewill offering from your hand, which you shall give [to Him] just as the LORD your God blesses you; 11and you shall rejoice before the LORD your God, you and your son and your daughter and your male and female servants and the Levite who is within your [city] gates, and the stranger and the orphan and the widow who are among you, at the place where the LORD your God chooses to establish His Name (Presence). 12You shall remember that you were a slave in Egypt, and you shall be careful to obey these statutes.

The Feast of Booths 13“You shall celebrate the Feast of Booths (Tabernacles) seven days, when you have gathered in [the grain] from your threshing floor and [the wine] from your wine vat. 14You shall rejoice in your feast, you and your son and your daughter and your male and female servants and the Levite and the stranger and the orphan and the widow who are within your city. 15Seven days you shall celebrate a feast to the LORD your God in the place which the LORD chooses, because the LORD your God will bless you in all your produce and in all the work of your hands, so that you will be altogether joyful.

16“Three times a year all your males shall appear before the LORD your God in the place which He chooses, at the Feast of Unleavened Bread (Passover) and at the Feast of Weeks (Pentecost) and at the Feast of Booths (Tabernacles), and they shall not appear before the LORD empty-handed. 17Every man shall give as he is able, in accordance with the blessing which the LORD your God has given you.

18“You shall appoint judges and officers in all your cities (gates) which the LORD your God is giving you, according to your tribes, and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment. 19You shall not distort justice; you shall not be partial, and you shall not take a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and perverts the words of the righteous. 20You shall pursue justice, and only justice [that which is uncompromisingly righteous], so that you may live and take possession of the land which the LORD your God is giving you.

21“You shall not plant for yourself an Asherah of any kind of tree or wood beside the altar of the LORD your God, which you shall make. 22You shall not set up for yourself a sacred pillar which the LORD your God hates.

Deuteronomy 17
Administration Of Justice

1“You shall not sacrifice to the LORD your God an ox or sheep with a blemish or any defect, for that is a detestable thing to the LORD your God.

2“If there is discovered among you, within any of your cities, which the LORD your God is giving you, a man or a woman who does evil in the sight of the LORD your God, by transgressing (violating) His covenant, 3and has gone and served other gods and worshiped them, or the sun or the moon or any of the heavenly host, [doing these things] which I have commanded not to do, 4and if it is told to you and you hear about it, then you shall investigate thoroughly [all the charges]. If it is confirmed beyond doubt that this detestable thing has been done in Israel, 5then you shall bring that man or that woman who has done this evil thing to the gates [of your city] and you shall stone the man or the woman to death. 6On the evidence of two or three witnesses, he who is to die shall be put to death; he shall not be put to death on the evidence of [only] one witness. 7The hand of the witnesses shall be the first against him to put him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people. So you shall remove the evil from among you.

8“If any case is too difficult for you to judge—between one kind of homicide and another, between one kind of lawsuit and another, between one kind of assault and another, being controversial issues in your courts—then you shall arise and go to the place which the LORD your God chooses. 9So you shall come to the Levitical priests or to the judge who is in office at that time, and you shall consult them and they will declare to you the verdict in the case. 10You shall act in accordance with the terms of the verdict which they declare to you from that place which the LORD chooses. You shall be careful to act in accordance with all of their instructions. 11You shall act in accordance with the law which they teach you and the judgment which they tell you. You shall not turn aside from their verdict, to the right or to the left. 12The man who acts presumptuously and insolently by not listening to the priest who stands there to serve the LORD your God, nor to the judge, that man shall die; so you shall remove the evil from Israel. 13Then all the people will hear and be afraid, and will not act presumptuously again.

14“When you enter the land which the LORD your God is giving you, and you take possession of it and live there, and you say, ‘I will set a king over me like all the nations who are around me,’ 15you shall most certainly set a king over you whom the LORD your God chooses. You shall set a king over you from among your countrymen (brothers); you may not choose a foreigner [to rule] over you who is not your countryman. 16Further, he shall not acquire many [war] horses for himself, nor make the people return to Egypt in order to acquire horses [to expand his military power], since the LORD said to you, ‘You shall never return that way again.’ 17He shall not acquire multiple wives for himself, or else his heart will turn away [from God]; nor [for the same reason] shall he acquire great amounts of silver and gold.

18“Now it shall come about when he sits on the throne of his kingdom, he shall write for himself a copy of this law on a scroll in the presence of the Levitical priests. 19And it shall be with him and he shall read it all the days of his life, so that he may learn to fear [and worship] the LORD his God [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect], by carefully obeying (keeping foremost in his thoughts and actively doing) all the words of this law and these statutes, 20so that his heart will not be lifted up above his countrymen [by a false sense of self-importance and self-reliance] and that he will not turn away (deviate) from the commandment, to the right or to the left, so that he and his sons may continue [to reign] for a long time in his kingdom in Israel.

Deuteronomy 18
Portion Of The Levites

1“The Levitical priests, the entire tribe of Levi, shall own [privately] no portion [of land] or inheritance with Israel; they shall eat the LORD’S offerings by fire and His portion. 2They shall have no inheritance [of land] among their countrymen (brothers, brethren); the LORD is their inheritance, as He promised them.

3“Now this shall be the priests’ portion from the people, from those offering a sacrifice, either an ox or a sheep: they shall give to the priest the shoulder and the two cheeks and the stomach. 4You shall also give him the first fruits of your grain, your new wine [the first of the season], and your [olive] oil, and the first sheared fleece of your sheep. 5For the LORD your God has chosen him, him and his sons from all your tribes, to stand and serve in the name of the LORD forever.

6“Now if a Levite comes from any of your cities throughout Israel where he resides, and comes whenever he wishes to [the sanctuary] the place which the LORD chooses; 7then he shall serve in the name of the LORD his God, like all his fellow Levites who stand there before the LORD. 8They shall have equal portions to eat, except what they receive from the sale of their fathers’ estates.

Spiritism Forbidden 9“When you enter the land which the LORD your God is giving you, you shall not learn to imitate the detestable (repulsive) practices of those nations. 10There shall not be found among you anyone who makes his son or daughter pass through the fire [as a sacrifice], one who uses divination and fortune-telling, one who practices witchcraft, or one who interprets omens, or a sorcerer, 11or one who casts a charm or spell, or a medium, or a spiritist, or a necromancer [who seeks the dead]. 12For everyone who does these things is utterly repulsive to the LORD; and because of these detestable practices the LORD your God is driving them out before you. 13You shall be blameless (complete, perfect) before the LORD your God. 14For these nations which you shall dispossess listen to those who practice witchcraft and to diviners and fortune-tellers, but as for you, the LORD your God has not allowed you to do so.

15“The LORD your God will raise up for you a prophet like me [Moses] from among you, from your countrymen (brothers, brethren). You shall listen to him. 16This is according to all that you asked of the LORD your God at Horeb (Mount Sinai) on the day of the assembly, saying, ‘Let me not hear the voice of the LORD my God again, nor see this great fire anymore, so that I will not die.’ 17The LORD said to me, ‘They have spoken well. 18‘I will raise up a prophet from among their countrymen like you, and I will put My words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all that I command him. 19‘It shall come about that whoever will not listen to My words which he shall speak in My name, I Myself will require it of him [and there will be consequences]. 20‘But the prophet who presumes to speak a word in My name which I have not commanded him to speak, or which he speaks in the name of other gods—that prophet shall die.’ 21If you say in your heart, ‘How will we know and recognize the word which the LORD has not spoken?’ 22When a prophet speaks in the name of the LORD and the thing does not happen or come true, that is the thing which the LORD has not spoken. The prophet has spoken it presumptuously; you shall not be afraid of him.

Deuteronomy 19
Cities Of Refuge

1“When the LORD your God cuts off (destroys) the nations whose land He is giving you, and you dispossess them and live in their cities and in their houses, 2you shall designate three cities for yourself in the central area of the land, which the LORD your God is giving you to possess. 3You shall prepare and maintain for yourself the roads [to these cities], and divide the territory of your land into three parts, so that anyone who kills another unintentionally may escape there [for asylum].

4“Now this is the case of the offender (manslayer) who may escape there and live [protected from vengeance]: when he kills his neighbor unintentionally, not having hated him previously— 5as [for example] when a man goes into the forest with his neighbor to cut wood, and his hand swings the axe to cut down the tree, but the iron head slips off the wooden handle and hits his companion and he dies—the offender may escape to one of these cities and live; 6otherwise the avenger of blood might pursue the offender in the heat of anger, and overtake him, because it is a long way, and take his life, even though he did not deserve to die, since he did not hate his neighbor beforehand. 7Therefore, I command you, saying, ‘You shall set aside three cities [of refuge] for yourself.’

8“If the LORD your God enlarges your border, as He has sworn to your fathers to do, and gives you all the land which He promised to give to your fathers— 9if you keep and carefully observe all these commandments which I am commanding you today, to love the LORD your God, and to walk [that is, to live each and every day] always in His ways—then you shall add three more cities [of refuge] for yourself, besides these three, 10so that innocent blood will not be shed [by blood avengers] in your land which the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, and blood guilt will not be on you [for the death of an innocent man].

11“But if there is a man who hates his neighbor and lies in wait and ambush for him and attacks him and strikes him down so that he dies, and the assailant escapes to one of these cities, 12then the elders of his own city shall send for him and have him taken back from there and turn him over to the avenger of blood, so that he may be put to death. 13You shall not pity him [the guilty one], but you shall purge the blood of the innocent from Israel, so that it may go well with you.

Laws of Landmark and Testimony 14“You shall not move your neighbor’s boundary mark, which the forefathers [who first divided the territory] have set, in the land which you will inherit in the land which the LORD your God is giving you to possess.

15“A single witness shall not appear in a trial against a man for any wrong or any sin which he has committed; [only] on the testimony or evidence of two or three witnesses shall a charge be confirmed. 16If a malicious witness rises up against a man to [falsely] accuse him of wrongdoing, 17then both parties to the controversy shall stand before the LORD, before the priests and the judges who will be in office at that time. 18The judges shall investigate thoroughly, and if the witness is a false witness, and he has accused his brother falsely, 19then you shall do to him just as he had intended to do to his brother. So you shall remove the evil from among you. 20Those who remain will hear and be afraid, and will never again do such an evil thing among you. 21You shall not show pity [to the guilty one]: it shall be life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

Deuteronomy 20
Laws Of Warfare

1“When you go out to battle against your enemies and see horses and chariots and people more numerous than you, do not be afraid of them; for the LORD your God, who brought you up from the land of Egypt, is with you. 2When you approach the battle, the priest shall come forward and speak to the people, 3and shall say to them, ‘Hear, O Israel: you are advancing today to battle against your enemies. Do not lack courage. Do not be afraid, or panic, or tremble [in terror] before them, 4for the LORD your God is He who goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.’ 5The officers shall also speak to the soldiers, saying, ‘What man is there who has built a new house and has not yet dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, otherwise he might die in the battle and another man would dedicate it. 6‘What man has planted a vineyard and has not put it to use [harvesting its fruit]? Let him go and return to his house, otherwise he might die in the battle and another man would begin to use its fruit. 7‘And who is the man who is engaged (legally promised) to a woman and has not married her? Let him go and return to his house, otherwise he might die in the battle and another man would marry her.’ 8Then the officers shall speak further to the soldiers and say, ‘Who is the man who is afraid and lacks courage? Let him go and return to his house, so that he does not cause his brothers’ courage to fail like his own.’ 9And it shall be when the officers have finished speaking to the soldiers, they shall appoint commanders of armies over them.

10“When you advance to a city to fight against it, you shall [first] offer it terms of peace. 11If that city accepts your terms of peace and opens its gates to you, then all the people who are found in it shall become your forced labor and shall serve you. 12However, if it does not make peace with you, but makes war against you, then you shall lay siege to it. 13When the LORD your God gives it into your hand, you shall strike down all the men in it with the edge of the sword. 14Only the women and the children and the animals and everything that is in the city, all its spoil, you shall take as plunder for yourself; and you shall use the spoil of your enemies which the LORD your God has given you. 15That is what you shall do to all the cities that are very far away from you, which are not among the cities of these nations nearby [which you are to dispossess]. 16Only in the cities of these peoples that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, you shall not leave alive anything that breathes. 17But you shall utterly destroy them, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite, just as the LORD your God has commanded you, 18so that they will not teach you to act in accordance with all the detestable practices which they have done [in worship and service] for their gods, and in this way cause you to sin against the LORD your God.

19“When you besiege a city for a long time, making war against it in order to capture it, you shall not destroy its [fruit-bearing] trees by swinging an axe against them; for you may eat from them, and you shall not cut them down. For is the tree of the field a man, that it should be besieged (destroyed) by you? 20Only the trees which you know are not fruit trees shall you destroy and cut down, so that you may build siegeworks against the city that is making war with you until it falls.

Deuteronomy 21
Expiation Of A Crime

1“If someone is found slain, lying in the field, in the land which the LORD your God gives you to possess, and it is not known who has killed him, 2then your elders and judges shall go out and measure the distance to the cities which are around the dead person. 3It shall be that the elders of the city which is nearest to the dead man shall take a heifer of the herd, one which has not been worked and which has not pulled in a yoke; 4and the elders of that city shall bring the heifer down to a [river] valley with running water, which has not been plowed or planted, and shall break the heifer’s neck there in the valley. 5Then the priests, the sons of Levi, shall approach, for the LORD your God has chosen them to serve Him and to bless in the Name (Presence) of the LORD; and every dispute and every assault (violent crime) shall be settled by them. 6All the elders of that city nearest to the dead man shall wash their hands over the heifer whose neck was broken in the valley; 7and they shall respond, and say, ‘Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it. 8‘Forgive Your people Israel whom You have redeemed, O LORD, and do not put the guilt of innocent blood among Your people Israel.’ And the guilt of blood shall be forgiven them. 9So shall you remove the guilt of innocent blood from among you, when you do what is right in the sight of the LORD.

Domestic Relations 10“When you go out to battle against your enemies, and the LORD your God hands them over to you and you lead them away captive, 11and you see a beautiful woman among the captives, and desire her and would take her as your wife, 12then you shall bring her [home] to your house, and she shall shave her head and trim her nails [in preparation for mourning]. 13She shall take off the clothes of her captivity and remain in your house, and weep (mourn) for her father and her mother a full month. After that you may go in to her and be her husband and she shall be your wife. 14But it shall be that if you have no delight and take no pleasure in her, then you shall let her go wherever she wishes. You certainly shall not sell her for money; you shall not deal with her as a slave or mistreat her, because you have humbled her [by forced marriage].

15“If a man has two wives, one loved and the other unloved, and both the loved and the unloved have born him sons, and the firstborn son belongs to the unloved wife, 16then on the day when he wills his possessions to his sons, he cannot treat the son of his loved wife as firstborn in place of the son of the unloved wife—the [actual] firstborn. 17Instead he shall acknowledge the son of the unloved as the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that he has, for he was the beginning of his strength (generative power); to him belongs the right of the firstborn.

18“If any man has a stubborn and rebellious son who will not obey the voice of his father or of his mother, and when they reprimand and discipline him, he will not listen to them, 19then his father and mother shall take hold of him, and bring him out to the elders of his city at the gateway of his hometown. 20They shall say to the elders of his city, ‘This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious; he will not obey us, he is a glutton and a drunkard.’ 21Then all the men of his city shall stone him to death; so you shall remove the evil from among you, and all Israel will hear of it and be afraid.

22“And if a man has committed a sin worthy of death, and he is put to death and [afterward] you hang him on a tree [as a public example], 23his body shall not hang all night on the tree, but you shall most certainly bury him on the same day (for he who is hanged is cursed by God), so that you do not defile your land which the LORD your God gives you as an inheritance.

Deuteronomy 22
Various Laws

1“You shall not see your countryman’s ox or his sheep straying away or being stolen, and ignore [your duty to help] them; you shall certainly take them back to him. 2If your countryman is not nearby or you do not know him, you shall bring the animal to your house, and it shall stay with you until he searches for it; then you shall return it to him. 3You shall do this with his donkey or with his garment or with anything that your countryman has lost and you have found. You are not allowed to ignore [your duty to help] them. 4You shall not see your countryman’s donkey or his ox fall down along the road, and ignore [your duty to help] them; you shall certainly help him lift it up.

5“A woman shall not wear a man’s clothing, nor shall a man put on a woman’s clothing; for whoever does these things is utterly repulsive to the LORD your God.

6“If you happen to come upon a bird’s nest along the road, in any tree or on the ground, with young ones or eggs, and the mother [bird] is sitting on the young or on the eggs, you shall not take the mother with the young. 7You shall certainly let the mother go, but you may take the young for yourself, so that it may be well with you and that you may prolong your days.

8“When you build a new house, you shall make a railing (parapet) around your [flat] roof, so that you do not bring the guilt of [innocent] blood on your house if someone falls from it.

9“You shall not sow your vineyard with two kinds of seed, or everything produced by the seed which you have sown and the yield of the vineyard will become defiled [and banned for use].

10“You shall not plow with an ox [a clean animal] and a donkey [an unclean animal] together.

11“You shall not wear a fabric made of wool and linen blended together [a fabric pagans believed to be magical].

12“You shall make tassels for yourself on the four corners of your outer garment with which you cover yourself.

Laws on Morality 13“If any man takes a wife and goes in to her and then scorns and hates her, 14and charges her [without cause] with shameful behavior and publicly defames her, and says, ‘I took this woman, but when I approached her, I did not find in her evidence of virginity,’ 15then the young woman’s father and her mother shall get and bring out the evidence of her virginity to the elders of the city at the gate [where court is held]. 16The father of the young woman shall say to the elders, ‘I gave my daughter to this man as a wife, but he hates her and has turned against her; 17and behold, he has made baseless charges against her, saying, “I did not find in your daughter the evidence of her virginity.” But this is the evidence of my daughter’s virginity.’ And they shall spread out the garment before the elders of the city. 18Then the elders of that city shall take the man and reprimand him, 19and they shall fine him a hundred shekels of silver and give it to the father of the young woman, because he publicly defamed a virgin of Israel. And she shall remain his wife; he is not allowed to divorce her as long as he lives.

20“But if this charge is true that the evidence of virginity was not found in the young woman, 21then they shall bring her out to the doorway of her father’s house, and the men of her city shall stone her to death because she has committed a deliberate sin in Israel by playing the prostitute in her father’s house. So you shall remove the evil from among you.

22“If a man is intimate with a woman who is another man’s wife, they shall both be put to death, the man who lay with the woman, and the woman. So you shall remove the evil from Israel.

23“If a young woman who is a virgin is engaged (legally betrothed) to a man, and another man finds her in the city and is intimate with her, 24then you shall bring them both out to the gate of that city and stone them to death—the young woman because she did not cry out for help [though she was] in the city, and the man because he has violated his neighbor’s [promised] wife. So you shall remove the evil from among you.

25“However, if the man finds the girl who is engaged (legally betrothed) in the [open] field, and seizes her and is intimate with her [by force], then only the man who lies with her shall be put to death. 26But you shall do nothing to the young woman; she has committed no sin worthy of death, for this is the same as when a man attacks his neighbor and murders him. 27When he found her in the [open] field, the engaged girl [may have] cried out for help, but there was no one to [hear and] save her.

28“If a man finds a girl who is a virgin, who is not engaged, and seizes her and is intimate with her and they are discovered, 29then the man who was intimate with her shall give fifty shekels of silver to the girl’s father, and she shall become his wife because he has violated her; he can never divorce her.

30“A man shall not take his father’s [former] wife, so that he will not expose his father’s wife.

Deuteronomy 23
Persons Excluded From The Assembly

1“He who has been castrated by having his testicles crushed or his male organ cut off shall not enter the congregation of the LORD. 2A person of illegitimate birth shall not enter the assembly of the LORD; none of his descendants, even to the tenth generation. 3An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter the assembly of the LORD; none of their descendants, even to the tenth generation, shall ever enter the assembly of the LORD, 4because they did not meet you with bread (food) and water on the road as you came out of Egypt, and because they hired [to act] against you Balaam the son of Beor from Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse you. 5Nevertheless, the LORD your God was not willing to listen to Balaam, but the LORD your God turned the curse into a blessing for you because the LORD your God has loved you. 6You shall never seek their peace nor their prosperity all your days.

7“You shall not detest an Edomite, for he is your brother [Esau’s descendant]. You shall not detest an Egyptian, because you were a stranger (resident alien, foreigner) in his land. 8Their children of the third generation who are born to them may enter the assembly of the LORD.

9“When you go out as an army [to fight] against your enemies, you shall keep yourselves from every evil [thing].

10“If there is any man among you who is [ceremonially] unclean because of nocturnal emission, then he must go outside the camp; he shall not come back to the camp. 11But when evening comes, he shall bathe in water, and at sundown he may return to the camp.

12“You shall also have a place outside the camp to which you may go, 13and you shall have a spade among your tools, and when you [prepare to] sit down outside [to relieve yourself], you shall dig a hole with it and shall turn and cover up your waste. 14Since the LORD your God walks in the midst of your camp to rescue you and to defeat your enemies before you, therefore your camp must be holy (undefiled); and He must not see anything indecent among you or He will turn away from you.

15“You shall not hand over to his master a slave who has escaped from his master to you. 16He shall live among you, in the place he chooses in one of your cities where it pleases him; you shall not mistreat or oppress him.

17“There shall be no cult prostitute among the daughters of Israel, nor shall there be a cult prostitute (a sodomite) among the sons of Israel. 18You shall not bring the wages of a prostitute or the price of a dog [that is, a male prostitute] into the house of the LORD your God as payment for any vow, for both of these [the gift and the giver] are utterly repulsive to the LORD your God.

19“You shall not charge interest to your fellow Israelite—interest on money, food or anything that may be loaned for interest. 20You may charge interest to a foreigner, but to your fellow Israelite you shall not charge interest, so that the LORD your God may bless you in all that you undertake in the land which you are about to enter to possess.

21“When you make a vow to the LORD your God, you shall not delay to pay it, for He will most certainly require it of you, and a delay would cause you to sin. 22But if you refrain from making a vow, that would not be [counted as] sin in you. 23You shall be careful to perform that [vow] which passes your lips, just as you have made a voluntary vow to the LORD your God, just as you have promised with your own words (mouth).

24“When you enter your neighbor’s vineyard, you may eat your fill of grapes, as many as you please, but you shall not put any in your basket [to take with you].

25“When you come into the standing grain of your neighbor, you may pluck the ears of grain with your hand, but you shall not wield a sickle in your neighbor’s standing grain [to harvest it].

Deuteronomy 24
Law Of Divorce

1“When a man takes a wife and marries her, and it happens that she loses his favor because he has found something indecent or unacceptable about her, and he writes her a certificate of divorce, puts it in her hand and sends her out of his house, 2and after she leaves his house, she goes and becomes another man’s wife, 3and if the latter husband turns against her and writes her a certificate of divorce, puts it in her hand, and sends her out of his house, or if the latter husband dies who took her as his wife, 4then her former husband who [first] sent her away may not take her again as his wife, since she has been defiled; for that is an outrage before the LORD, and you shall not bring sin on the land which the LORD your God gives you as an inheritance.

5“When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go out [to fight] with the army nor be charged with any duty; he shall be free at home for one year and shall bring happiness to his wife whom he has taken.

Various Laws 6“No one shall take a handmill or an upper millstone [used to grind grain into bread] as security [for a debt], for he would be taking a [person’s] life in pledge.

7“If a man is caught kidnapping any of his countrymen from the sons of Israel, and he treats him violently or sells him [as a slave], then that thief shall die. So you shall remove the evil from among you.

8“Be careful during an outbreak of leprosy, that you diligently observe and do according to all that the Levitical priests teach you; just as I have commanded them, so you shall be careful to do. 9Remember [with thoughtful concern] what the LORD your God did to Miriam on the road as you came out of Egypt.

10“When you lend your neighbor anything, you shall not go into his house to get his pledge (security deposit). 11You shall stand outside, and the man to whom you lend shall bring the pledge out to you. 12If the man is poor, you shall not keep his pledge overnight. 13You shall certainly restore the pledge (security deposit) to him at sunset, so that he may sleep in his garment and bless you; and it will be credited to you as righteousness (right standing) before the LORD your God.

14“You shall not take advantage of a hired servant who is poor and needy, whether [he is] one of your countrymen or one of the strangers (resident aliens, foreigners) who is in your land inside your cities. 15You shall give him his wages on the day that he earns them before the sun sets—for he is poor and is counting on it—so that he does not cry out to the LORD against you, and it becomes a sin for you.

16“The fathers shall not be put to death for [the sins of] their children, nor shall the children be put to death for their fathers; [only] for his own sin shall anyone be put to death.

17“You shall not pervert the justice due a stranger or an orphan, nor seize (impound) a widow’s garment as security [for a loan]. 18But you shall remember that you were a slave in Egypt, and the LORD your God redeemed you from there; therefore I am commanding you to do this thing.

19“When you reap your harvest in your field and have forgotten a sheaf [of grain] in the field, you shall not go back to get it; it shall be for the stranger, for the orphan, and for the widow, so that the LORD your God may bless you in all the work of your hands. 20When you beat [the olives off of] your olive tree, do not search through the branches again; [whatever is left] shall be for the stranger, for the orphan, and for the widow.

21“When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, you shall not glean it afterward; it shall be for the stranger, for the orphan, and for the widow. 22You shall [thoughtfully] remember [the fact] that you were a slave in the land of Egypt; therefore I am commanding you to do this thing.

Deuteronomy 25
Various Laws

1“If there is a controversy between men, and they go to court, and the judges decide [the issue] between them, and they judge in favor of the innocent and condemn the guilty, 2then it shall be that if the guilty man deserves to be beaten, the judge shall make him lie down and be beaten in his presence with a [certain] number of stripes in proportion to his offense. 3He may have him beaten forty times, but no more. He is not to be beaten with more stripes than these and he is not to be degraded [that is, treated like an animal] in your sight.

4“You shall not muzzle the ox while he is threshing [to prevent him from eating any of the grain].

5“If brothers are living together and one of them dies without a son, the widow of the deceased shall not be married outside the family to a stranger. Her husband’s brother shall be intimate with her after taking her as his wife and perform the duty of a husband’s brother to her. 6It shall be that her firstborn [son] will be given the name of the dead brother, so that his name will not be blotted out of Israel. 7But if the man does not want to marry his brother’s [widowed] wife, then she shall go up to the gate [of the city, where court is held] to the elders, and say, ‘My brother-in-law refuses to continue his brother’s name in Israel; he is not willing to perform the duty of a husband’s brother.’ 8Then the elders of his city will summon him and speak to him. And if he stands firm and says, ‘I do not want to marry her,’ 9then his brother’s widow shall approach him in the presence of the elders, and pull his sandal off his foot and spit in his face; and she shall answer and say, ‘So it is done to that man who does not build up his brother’s household.’ 10In Israel his [family] name shall be, ‘The house of him whose sandal was removed.’

11“If [two] men, a man and his countryman, are fighting and the wife of one approaches to rescue her husband from the man who is striking him, and she reaches out with her hand and grabs the aggressor’s genitals, 12then you shall cut off her hand; you shall not show pity [for her].

13“You shall not have in your bag inaccurate weights, a heavy and a light [so you can cheat others]. 14You shall not have in your house inaccurate measures, a large and a small. 15You shall have a perfect (full) and just weight, and a perfect and just measure, so that your days may be long in the land which the LORD your God gives you. 16For everyone who does such things, everyone who acts unjustly [without personal integrity] is utterly repulsive to the LORD your God.

17“Remember what Amalek did to you along the road when you came from Egypt, 18how he met you along the road and attacked all the stragglers at your rear when you were tired and weary; and he did not fear God. 19Therefore when the LORD your God has given you rest from all your surrounding enemies, in the land which the LORD your God gives you as an inheritance to possess, you shall wipe out the memory of Amalek from under heaven; you must not forget.

Deuteronomy 26
Offering First Fruits

1“Then it shall be, when you enter the land which the LORD your God gives you as an inheritance, and you take possession of it and live in it, 2that you shall take some of the first of all the produce of the ground which you harvest from the land that the LORD your God gives you, and you shall put it in a basket and go to the place where the LORD your God chooses to establish His Name (Presence). 3You shall go to the priest who is in office at that time and say to him, ‘I declare this day to the LORD my God that I have entered the land which the LORD swore to our fathers to give us.’ 4Then the priest will take the basket from you and place it before the altar of the LORD your God. 5And you shall say before the LORD your God, ‘My father [Jacob] was a wandering Aramean, and he [along with his family] went down to Egypt and lived there [as strangers], few in number; but while there he became a great, mighty and populous nation. 6‘And the Egyptians treated us badly and oppressed us, and imposed hard labor on us. 7‘Then we cried out to the LORD, the God of our fathers for help, and He heard our voice and saw our suffering and our labor and our [cruel] oppression; 8and the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and with an outstretched arm and with great terror [suffered by the Egyptians] and with signs and with wonders; 9and He has brought us to this place and has given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. 10‘And now, look, I have brought the first of the produce of the ground which You, O LORD, have given me.’ And you shall place it before the LORD your God, and shall worship before the LORD your God; 11and you and the Levite and the stranger (resident alien, foreigner) among you shall rejoice in all the good which the LORD your God has given you and your household.

12“When you have finished paying all the tithe of your produce the third year, [which is] the year of tithing, then you shall give it to the Levite, to the stranger, to the orphan, and to the widow, so that they may eat within the gates of your cities and be satisfied. 13You shall say before the LORD your God, ‘I have removed the sacred portion (the tithe) from my house and also have given it to the Levite, to the stranger, to the orphan, and to the widow, in accordance with all that You have commanded me. I have not transgressed or forgotten any of Your commandments. 14‘I have not eaten from the tithe while mourning, nor have I removed any of it when I was [ceremonially] unclean [making the tithe ceremonially unclean], nor offered any of it to the dead. I have listened to the voice of the LORD my God; I have done everything in accordance with all that You have commanded me. 15‘Look down from Your holy dwelling above, from heaven, and bless Your people Israel, and the land which You have given us, as You have sworn to our fathers, a land [of plenty] flowing with milk and honey.’

16“This day the LORD your God commands you to do these statutes and judgments (precepts). Therefore, you shall be careful to do them with all your heart and with all your soul (your entire being). 17Today you have [openly] declared the LORD to be your God, and that you will walk [that is, live each and every day] in His ways and keep His statutes, His commandments, and His judgments (precepts), and listen to His voice. 18Today the LORD has declared that you are His people, His treasured possession, just as He promised you, and that you are to keep all His commandments; 19and that He will set you high above all the nations which He has made, for praise, fame, and honor: and that you shall be a holy people [set apart and consecrated] to the LORD your God, just as He has spoken.”

Deuteronomy 27
The Altar At Mount Ebal

1Then Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, “Keep (remember, obey) all the commandments which I am commanding you today. 2So it shall be on the day when you cross the Jordan to [enter] the land which the LORD your God gives you, that you shall set up for yourself large stones and coat them with plaster (lime, whitewash). 3You shall write on the stones all the words of this law when you cross over, so that you may go into the land which the LORD your God gives you, a land [of plenty] flowing with milk and honey, just as the LORD, the God of your fathers has promised you. 4Now when you cross the Jordan you shall set up these stones on Mount Ebal, just as I am commanding you today and coat them with plaster. 5There you shall build an altar to the LORD your God, an altar of stones; you shall not use an iron tool on them. 6You shall build the altar of the LORD your God with whole [uncut] stones, and offer burnt offerings on it to the LORD your God; 7and you shall sacrifice peace offerings and shall eat there, and shall rejoice before the LORD your God. 8“And you shall write very clearly on the stones all the words of this law.”

9Then Moses and the Levitical priests said to all Israel, “Be silent and listen, O Israel! This day you have become a people for the LORD your God. 10“So you shall obey the voice of the LORD your God, and do His commandments and statutes which I am commanding you today.”

The Curses of Mount Ebal 11Moses also commanded the people that day, saying, 12“These [tribes] shall stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people when you have crossed the Jordan: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin. 13These [tribes] shall stand on Mount Ebal to pronounce the curse [for disobedience]: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali. 14The Levites shall answer with a loud voice to all the men of Israel:

15‘Cursed is the man who makes a carved or cast image (idol), a repulsive thing to the LORD, the work of the hands of the artisan, and sets it up in secret.’ All the people shall answer and say, ‘Amen.’

16‘Cursed is he who dishonors (treats with contempt) his father or his mother.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

17‘Cursed is he who moves his neighbor’s boundary mark.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

18‘Cursed is he who misleads a blind person on the road.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

19‘Cursed is he who distorts (perverts) the justice due to a stranger, an orphan, and a widow.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

20‘Cursed is he who is intimate with his father’s [former] wife, because he has violated what belongs to his father.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

21‘Cursed is he who is intimate with any animal.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

22‘Cursed is he who is intimate with his [half] sister, whether his father’s or his mother’s daughter.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

23‘Cursed is he who is intimate with his mother-in-law.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

24‘Cursed is he who strikes his neighbor in secret.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

25‘Cursed is he who accepts a bribe to strike down an innocent person.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

26‘Cursed is he who does not confirm the words of this law by doing them [keeping them, taking them to heart as the rule of his life].’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’

Deuteronomy 28
Blessings At Gerizim

1“Now it shall be, if you diligently listen to and obey the voice of the LORD your God, being careful to do all of His commandments which I am commanding you today, the LORD your God will set you high above all the nations of the earth. 2All these blessings will come upon you and overtake you if you pay attention to the voice of the LORD your God.

3“You will be blessed in the city, and you will be blessed in the field.

4“The offspring of your body and the produce of your ground and the offspring of your animals, the offspring of your herd and the young of your flock will be blessed.

5“Your basket and your kneading bowl will be blessed.

6“You will be blessed when you come in and you will be blessed when you go out.

7“The LORD will cause the enemies who rise up against you to be defeated before you; they will come out against you one way, but flee before you seven ways. 8The LORD will command the blessing upon you in your storehouses and in all that you undertake, and He will bless you in the land which the LORD your God gives you. 9The LORD will establish you as a people holy [and set apart] to Himself, just as He has sworn to you, if you keep the commandments of the LORD your God and walk [that is, live your life each and every day] in His ways. 10So all the peoples of the earth will see that you are called by the name of the LORD, and they will be afraid of you. 11The LORD will give you great prosperity, in the offspring of your body and in the offspring of your livestock and the produce of your ground, in the land which the LORD swore to your fathers to give you. 12The LORD will open for you His good treasure house, the heavens, to give rain to your land in its season and to bless all the work of your hand; and you will lend to many nations, but you will not borrow. 13The LORD will make you the head (leader) and not the tail (follower); and you will be above only, and you will not be beneath, if you listen and pay attention to the commandments of the LORD your God, which I am commanding you today, to observe them carefully. 14Do not turn aside from any of the words which I am commanding you today, to the right or to the left, to follow and serve other gods.

Consequences of Disobedience 15“But it shall come about, if you do not listen to and obey the voice of the LORD your God, being careful to do all His commandments and His statutes which I am commanding you today, then all these curses will come upon you and overtake you:

16“You will be cursed in the city and cursed in the field.

17“Your basket and your kneading bowl will be cursed.

18“The offspring of your body and the produce of your land, the offspring of your herd and the young of your flock will be cursed.

19“You will be cursed when you come in and you will be cursed when you go out.

20“The LORD will send upon you curses, confusion, and rebuke in everything that you undertake to do, until you are destroyed, perishing quickly because of the evil of your deeds, because you have turned away from Me. 21The LORD will make the pestilence and plague cling to you until He has consumed and eliminated you from the land which you are entering to possess. 22The LORD will strike you with consumption [causing you to waste away] and with fever and with inflammation and with fiery heat and with the sword and with blight and with mildew [on your crops]; and they will pursue you until you perish. 23The heaven which is over your head shall be bronze [giving no rain and blocking all prayers], and the earth which is under you, iron [hard to plow and yielding no produce]. 24The LORD will make the rain of your land powder and dust; from heaven it will come down on you until you are destroyed.

25“The LORD will cause you to be defeated before your enemies; you will go out against them one way, but flee before them seven ways, and you will be an example of terror to all the kingdoms of the earth [when they see your destruction]. 26Your carcasses will be food for all the birds of the sky and the beasts of the earth, and there will be no one to frighten them away.

27“The LORD will strike you with the boils of Egypt and with tumors and with the scab and the itch that you cannot heal. 28The LORD will strike you with madness and with blindness and with bewilderment of heart and mind; 29and you will be groping at noon [in broad daylight], just as the blind grope in the darkness, and nothing you do will prosper; but you will only be oppressed and exploited and robbed continually, with no one to save you. 30You will be pledged to marry a wife, but another man will be intimate with her [before you]; you will build a house, but you will not live in it; you will plant a vineyard, but you will not use its fruit. 31Your ox will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will not eat any of it; your donkey will be torn away from you, and it will not be returned to you; your sheep will be given to your enemies, and you will have no one to save you. 32Your sons and daughters will be given to another people, while your eyes look on and long for them continually; but there will be nothing you can do. 33A people whom you do not know will eat the produce of your land and all the products of your labors, and you will never be anything but oppressed and exploited and crushed continually. 34You shall be driven mad by the sight of the things you see. 35The LORD will strike you on the knees and on the legs with sore boils that you cannot heal, from the sole of your foot to the crown of your head. 36The LORD will bring you and your king, whom you appoint over you, to a nation which you and your fathers have never known; there you will [be forced to] serve other gods, [lifeless gods of] wood and stone. 37And you will become a horror, a proverb [a mere object lesson], and a taunt [a derisive joke] among all the people to which the LORD drives you.

38“You will bring out a great quantity of seed to the field, but you will gather in little, because the locusts will consume it. 39You will plant vineyards and cultivate them, but you will not drink the wine or gather the grapes, because the worm will eat them. 40You will have olive trees throughout your territory but you will not anoint yourselves with the oil, because your olives will drop off. 41You will have sons and daughters, but they will not be yours [for long], because they will go into captivity. 42The cricket will take possession of all your trees and the produce of your ground. 43The stranger who lives among you will rise above you higher and higher, and you will go down lower and lower. 44He will lend to you [out of his affluence], but you will not lend to him [because of your poverty]; he will be the head, and you the tail.

45“So all these curses will come on you and pursue you and overtake you until you are destroyed, because you would not obey the voice of the LORD your God by keeping His commandments and His statutes which He has commanded you. 46They will be a sign and a wonder to you and your descendants forever.

47“Because you did not serve the LORD your God with a heart full of joy and gladness for the abundance of all things [with which He blessed you], 48you will therefore serve your enemies whom the LORD sends against you, in hunger and in thirst, in nakedness and in lack of all things; and He will put an iron yoke [of slavery] on your neck until He has destroyed you.

49“The LORD will bring a nation against you from far away, from the end of the earth, [as swift] as the eagle swoops down [to attack], a nation whose language you will not understand, 50a defiant nation who will have no respect for the old, nor show favor to the young, 51and it will eat the offspring of your herd and the produce of your ground until you are destroyed, who will leave you no grain, new wine, or oil, nor the offspring of your herd or the young of your flock until they have caused you to perish. 52They will besiege you in all your cities until your high and fortified walls in which you trusted come down throughout your land; and they will besiege you in all your cities throughout your land which the LORD your God has given you. 53Then you will eat the offspring of your own body [to avoid starvation], the flesh of your sons and daughters whom the LORD your God has given you, during the siege and the misery by which your enemy will oppress you. 54The man who is most refined and well-bred among you will be cruel and hostile toward his brother and toward the wife he cherishes and toward the rest of his children who remain, 55so that he will not give even one of them any of the flesh of his children which he will eat, because he has nothing else left, during the siege and the misery by which your enemy will oppress you in all your cities. 56The most refined and well-bred woman among you, who would not venture to set the sole of her foot on the ground because she is so delicate and pampered, will be cruel and hostile toward the husband she cherishes and toward her son and daughter, 57and toward her afterbirth that comes from between her legs and toward the children whom she bears; for she will eat them secretly for lack of anything else, during the siege and the misery by which your enemy will oppress you in your cities.

58“If you are not careful to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, to fear and honor with reverence this glorious and awesome name, the LORD your God, 59then the LORD will bring extraordinary plagues on you and your descendants, even severe and lasting plagues, and miserable and chronic sicknesses. 60Moreover, He will bring on you all the diseases of Egypt of which you were afraid, and they will cling to you. 61Also the LORD will bring on you every sickness and every plague which is not written in this book of this law, until you are destroyed. 62Because you did not obey the voice of the LORD your God, you who were as numerous as the stars of heaven shall be left few in number. 63It shall come about that just as the LORD delighted over you to make you prosper and multiply, so the LORD will delight over you to bring you to ruin and destruction; and you will be uprooted [violently] from the land which you are entering to possess. 64And the LORD will scatter you among all the nations, from one end of the earth to the other; and there you will [be forced to] serve other gods, [lifeless gods of] wood and stone, which neither you nor your fathers have known. 65Among those nations you will find no peace (rest), and there will be no resting place for the sole of your foot; but there the LORD will give you a trembling heart, failing eyes, and a despairing soul. 66Your life will hang in doubt before you; night and day you will be filled with anxiety and have no assurance of living. 67In the morning you will say, ‘I wish it were evening!’ and in the evening you will say, ‘I wish it were morning!’—because of the dread in your heart with which you tremble, and because of the sight of your eyes which you will see. 68The LORD will bring you back to Egypt in ships, by the way about which I said to you, ‘You will never see it again!’ And there you will offer yourselves for sale to your enemies as male and female slaves, but there will be no one to buy you.

Deuteronomy 29
The Covenant In Moab

1These are the words of the covenant which the LORD commanded Moses to make with the sons of Israel in the land of Moab, in addition to the covenant which He made with them at Horeb (Sinai).

2Moses summoned all Israel and said to them, “You have seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, to all his servants, and to all his land; 3the great trials [of Pharaoh] which your eyes have seen, the signs and those great wonders. 4Yet to this day the LORD has not given you a heart and mind to understand, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear. 5I have led you in the wilderness forty years; your clothes have not worn out on you, and your sandals have not worn out on your feet. 6You have not eaten bread, nor have you drunk wine or strong drink, so that you might know that I am the LORD your God [on whom you must depend]. 7When you reached this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon and Og the king of Bashan came out to meet us in battle, but we defeated them; 8and we took their land and gave it as an inheritance to the tribe of Reuben, the tribe of Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh. 9So keep the words of this covenant and obey them, so that you may prosper and be successful in everything that you do.

10“All of you stand today before the LORD your God—your chiefs, your tribes, your elders and your officers, even all the men of Israel, 11your little ones, your wives, and the stranger (resident alien, foreigner) who is in your camps, from the one who chops and gathers your firewood to the one who draws your water— 12so that you may enter into the covenant of the LORD your God, and into His oath and agreement which the LORD your God is making with you today, 13so that He may establish you today as His people and that He may be your God, just as He spoke to you and as He swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

14“It is not with you alone that I am making this covenant and this oath, 15but with those [future Israelites] who are not here with us today, as well as with those who stand here with us today in the presence of the LORD our God 16(for you know how we lived in the land of Egypt, and how we passed through the nations along the way; 17and you have seen their detestable acts and their [repulsive] idols of wood and stone, [lifeless images] of silver and gold, which they had with them), 18so that there will not be among you a man or woman, or family or tribe, whose heart turns away today from the LORD our God, to go and serve the [false] gods of these nations; so that there will not be among you a root [of idolatry] bearing poisonous fruit and wormwood (bitterness). 19It will happen that when he (a renegade) hears the words of this oath, and he imagines himself as blessed, saying, ‘I will have peace and safety even though I walk within the stubbornness of my heart [rejecting God and His law], in order that the watered land dwindles away along with the dry [destroying everything],’ 20the LORD will not be willing to forgive him, but then the anger of the LORD and His jealousy will burn against that man, and every curse which is written in this book will rest on him; the LORD will blot out his name from under heaven. 21Then the LORD will single him out for disaster from all the tribes of Israel [making an example of him], according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in this Book of the Law.

22Now the next generation, your children who come after you and the foreigner who comes from a distant land, when they see the plagues of this land and the diseases with which the LORD has afflicted it, will say, 23‘The whole land is brimstone and salt, a burning waste, unsown and unproductive, and no grass grows in it; it is like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which the LORD overthrew in His anger and wrath.’ 24All the nations will say, ‘Why has the LORD done this thing to this land? Why this great outburst of anger?’ 25Then people will say, ‘It is because they abandoned (broke) the covenant of the LORD, the God of their fathers, which He made with them when He brought them out of the land of Egypt. 26‘For they went and served other gods and worshiped them, [false] gods whom they have not known and whom He had not allotted (given) to them. 27‘So the anger of the LORD burned against this land, bringing on it every curse that is written in this book; 28and the LORD uprooted them from their land in anger and in wrath and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as it is this day.’

29“The secret things belong to the LORD our God, but the things which are revealed and disclosed belong to us and to our children forever, so that we may do all of the words of this law.

Deuteronomy 30
Restoration Promised

1“So it shall be when all these things have come on you, the blessing and the curse which I have set before you, and you call them to mind in all the nations where the LORD your God has driven you, 2and you have returned to the LORD your God and have listened to and obeyed His voice with all your heart and with all your soul, in accordance with everything that I am commanding you today, you and your children, 3then the LORD your God will restore your fortunes [in your return from exile], and have compassion on you, and will gather you together again from all the peoples (nations) where He has scattered you. 4Even if any of your dispersed are at the ends of the earth, the LORD your God will gather you together from there, and from there He will bring you back. 5The LORD your God will bring you into the land which your fathers possessed, and you will take possession of it; and He shall make you prosper and multiply—even more than your fathers.

6“And the LORD your God will circumcise your heart and the hearts of your descendants [that is, He will remove the desire to sin from your heart], so that you will love the LORD your God with all your heart and all your soul, so that you may live [as a recipient of His blessing]. 7The LORD your God will inflict all these curses on your enemies and on those who hate you, who have persecuted you. 8And you shall again listen to and obey the voice of the LORD, and do all His commandments which I command you today. 9Then the LORD your God shall make you abundantly prosperous in everything that you do, in the offspring of your body and in the offspring of your cattle and in the produce of your land; for the LORD will again delight over you for good, just as He delighted over your fathers, 10if you listen to and obey the voice of the LORD your God to keep His commandments and His statutes which are written in this Book of the Law, and if you turn to the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul (your entire being).

11“For this commandment which I am commanding you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it out of reach. 12It is not [a secret hidden] in heaven, that you should say, ‘Who will go up to heaven for us and bring it to us, so that we may hear it and obey it?’ 13Nor is it beyond the sea, that you should say, ‘Who will cross the sea for us and bring it to us, so that we may hear it and obey it?’ 14But the word is very near you, in your mouth and in your heart, so that you may obey it.

Choose Life 15“Listen closely, I have set before you today life and prosperity (good), and death and adversity (evil); 16in that I command you today to love the LORD your God, to walk [that is, to live each and every day] in His ways and to keep His commandments and His statutes and His judgments (precepts), so that you will live and multiply, and that the LORD your God will bless you in the land which you are entering to possess. 17But if your heart turns away and you will not hear and obey, but are drawn away and worship other gods and serve them, 18I declare to you today that you will certainly perish. You will not live long in the land which you cross the Jordan to enter and possess. 19I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you today, that I have set before you life and death, the blessing and the curse; therefore, you shall choose life in order that you may live, you and your descendants, 20by loving the LORD your God, by obeying His voice, and by holding closely to Him; for He is your life [your good life, your abundant life, your fulfillment] and the length of your days, that you may live in the land which the LORD promised (swore) to give to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”

Deuteronomy 31
Moses’ Last Counsel

1So Moses went and spoke these words to all Israel. 2And he said to them, “I am a hundred and twenty years old today; I am no longer able to come in and go out [as your spiritual and military leader], and the LORD has said to me, ‘You shall not cross this Jordan.’ 3It is the LORD your God who will cross ahead of you; He will destroy these nations before you, and you shall dispossess them. Joshua is the one who will go across before you [to lead you], just as the LORD has said. 4The LORD will do to them just as He did to Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, and to their land, when He destroyed them. 5The LORD will hand them over to you, and you shall do to them in accordance with all the commandments which I have commanded you. 6“Be strong and courageous, do not be afraid or tremble in dread before them, for it is the LORD your God who goes with you. He will not fail you or abandon you.”

7Then Moses called to Joshua and said to him in the sight of all [the people of] Israel, “Be strong and courageous, for you will go with this people into the land which the LORD has sworn to their fathers to give them, and you will give it to them as an inheritance. 8“It is the LORD who goes before you; He will be with you. He will not fail you or abandon you. Do not fear or be dismayed.”

9So Moses wrote this law and gave it to the priests, the sons of Levi who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and to all the elders of Israel. 10Then Moses commanded them, saying, “At the end of every seven years, at the time of year when debts are forgiven, at the Feast of Booths (Tabernacles), 11when all Israel comes to appear before the LORD your God in the place which He chooses, you shall read this law before all [the people of] Israel so that they may hear. 12Assemble the people, the men and the women and children and the stranger (resident alien, foreigner) within your cities, so that they may hear and learn and fear the LORD your God [with awe-filled reverence and profound respect], and be careful to obey all the words of this law. 13“Their children, who have not known [the law], will hear and learn to fear [and worship] the LORD your God, as long as you live in the land which you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”

Israel Will Fall Away 14Then the LORD said to Moses, “Behold, the time for you to die is near; call Joshua, and present yourselves at the Tent of Meeting, so that I may commission him.” So Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves at the Tent of Meeting. 15Then the LORD appeared in the tent in a pillar of cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood beside the doorway of the tent. 16The LORD said to Moses, “Behold, you are about to lie down [in death] with your fathers; and this people will arise and play the prostitute (commit apostasy) with the foreign gods [of the people] of the land, where they go to be among them. They will abandon (turn away from) Me and break My covenant which I have made with them. 17Then My anger will be kindled and burn against them in that day, and I will abandon (turn away from) them and hide My face from them. They will be devoured, and many evils and troubles will come on them, so that they will say in that day, ‘Is it not because our God is not among us that these evils have come on us?’ 18But I will certainly hide My face [from them] in that day because of all the evil which they will do, for they will turn to other gods [to worship lifeless idols, to honor handmade relics].

19“Now then, write this song for yourselves, and teach it to the sons of Israel; put it in their mouth, so that this song may be a witness for Me against the sons of Israel. 20For when I bring them into the land which I have sworn to their fathers, a land [of plenty] flowing with milk and honey, and they have eaten and are satisfied and become prosperous, then they will turn to other gods and serve them, and despise and reject Me and break My covenant. 21“Then it shall come about, when many evils and troubles have come on them, that this [sacred] song will confront them as a witness; for it will not be forgotten from the mouth of their descendants. For I know their inclination which is developing even now, before I bring them into the land which I have sworn to give them.” 22So Moses wrote this song the same day, and taught it to the children of Israel.

Joshua Is Commissioned 23Then He commanded and commissioned Joshua, the son of Nun, and said, “Be strong and courageous, for you will bring the sons of Israel into the land which I have sworn to give them, and I will be with you.”

24And when Moses completely finished writing the words of this law in a book, 25he commanded the Levites who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD, saying, 26“Take this Book of the Law and put it beside the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, so that it may remain there as a witness against you. 27For I know your rebellion and contention and your stubbornness; behold, while I am still alive with you today, you have been rebellious against the LORD; how much more, then, after my death? 28Assemble before me all the elders of your tribes and your officers, so that I may speak these words in their hearing and call heaven and earth as witnesses against them. 29“For I know that after my death you will behave corruptly and turn from the way which I have commanded you; and evil will come upon you in the latter days, because you will do evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger with the work of your hands.”

30Then Moses spoke in the hearing of all the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until they were ended:

Deuteronomy 32
The Song Of Moses

1“Listen, O heavens, and I will speak;
And let the earth hear the words of my mouth.
2“Let my teaching drop as the rain,
My speech distill as the dew,
As the light rain upon the tender grass,
And as the spring showers upon the herb.
3“For I proclaim the name [and presence] of the LORD;
Ascribe greatness and honor to our God!
4“The Rock! His work is perfect,
For all His ways are just;
A God of faithfulness without iniquity (injustice),
Just and upright is He.
5“They (Israel) have acted corruptly toward Him.
They are not His children, because of their [moral] defect;
But are a perverse and crooked generation.
6“Do you thus repay the LORD,
O foolish and unwise people?
Is not He your Father who has acquired you [as His own]?
He has made you and established you [as a nation].
7“Remember the days of old,
Consider the years of many generations.
Ask your father, and he will inform you,
Your elders, and they will tell you.
8“When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance,
When He separated the sons of man,
He set the boundaries of the peoples
According to the number of the sons of Israel.
9“For the LORD’S portion and chosen share is His people;
Jacob (Israel) is the allotment of His inheritance.
10“He found him in a desert land,
In the howling wasteland of a wilderness;
He kept circling him, He took care of him,
He protected him as the apple of His eye.
11“As an eagle that protects its nest,
That flutters over its young,
He spread out His wings and took them,
He carried them on His pinions.
12“So the LORD alone led him;
There was no foreign god with him.
13“He made him (Israel) ride on the high places of the earth,
And he ate the produce of the field;
And He made him suck honey from the rock,
And [olive] oil from the flinty rock,
14Butter and curds of cows, and milk of the flock,
With fat of lambs,
And rams, the breed of Bashan, and goats,
With the finest of the wheat;
And you drank wine, the blood of grapes.
15“But Jeshurun (Israel) became fat and kicked [at God].
You became fat, thick, sleek, and obstinate!
Then he abandoned God who had made him,
And scorned the Rock of his salvation.
16“They provoked Him to jealousy with strange gods [by denying Him the honor and loyalty that is rightfully and uniquely His];
And with repulsive acts they provoked Him to anger.
17“They sacrificed to demons, not to God,
To gods whom they have not known,
New gods who came lately,
Whom your fathers never feared.
18“You were unmindful of the Rock who bore you,
And you forgot the God who gave you birth.
19“The LORD saw it, and rejected them,
Out of indignation with His sons and His daughters.
20“Then He said, ‘I will hide My face from them,
I will see what their end shall be;
For they are a perverse generation,
Sons in whom there is no faithfulness.
21‘They have made Me jealous with what is not God;
They have provoked Me to anger with their idols.
So I will make them jealous with those who are not a people;
I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
22‘For a fire is kindled by My anger,
And it burns to the depths of Sheol (the place of the dead, the nether world),
It devours the earth with its yield,
And sets on fire the foundations of the mountains.
23‘I will heap misfortunes on them;
I will use My arrows on them.
24‘They will be wasted by hunger, and consumed by plague
And a bitter destruction;
And I will send the teeth of beasts against them,
With the venom of crawling things of the dust.
25‘Outside the sword will bereave,
And inside [the chambers] terror—
For both young man and virgin,
For the nursing child and the man of gray hair.
26‘I would have said, “I will cut them to pieces [scattering them far away],
I will remove the memory of them from men,”
27Had I not feared the provocation of the enemy,
That their adversaries would misjudge,
That they would say, “Our [own] hand has prevailed,
And the LORD has not done all this.”’
28“For they are a nation devoid of counsel,
And there is no understanding in them.
29“O that they were wise, that they understood this,
That they could discern their future and ultimate fate!
30“How could one chase a thousand,
And two put ten thousand to flight,
Unless their Rock had sold them,
And the LORD had given them up?
31“For their rock is not like our Rock,
Even our enemies themselves judge this.
32“For their vine is from the vine of Sodom,
And from the fields of Gomorrah;
Their grapes are grapes of poison,
Their clusters, bitter.
33“Their wine is the venom of serpents,
And the deadly poison of vipers.
34‘Is it not laid up in store with Me,
Sealed up in My treasuries?
35‘Vengeance is Mine, and retribution,
In due time their foot will slip;
For the day of their disaster is at hand,
And their doom hurries to meet them.’
36“For the LORD will vindicate His people,
And will have compassion on His servants,
When He sees that their strength (hand) is gone,
And none remains, whether bond or free.
37“And He will say, ‘Where are their gods,
The rock in which they took refuge?
38‘Who ate the fat of their sacrifices,
And drank the wine of their drink offering?
Let them rise up and help you,
Let them be your hiding place!
39‘See now that I, I am He,
And there is no god besides Me;
It is I who put to death and I who give life.
I have wounded and it is I who heal,
And there is no one who can deliver from [the power of] My hand.
40‘Indeed, I lift up My hand to heaven,
And say (swear an oath), as I live forever,
41If I sharpen the lightning of My sword,
And My hand takes hold of judgment,
I will render vengeance on My adversaries,
And I will repay those who hate Me.
42‘I will make My arrows drunk with blood,
And My sword will devour flesh,
With the blood of the slain and the captives,
From the heads of the leaders of the enemy.’
43“Rejoice, O nations, with His people;
For He will avenge the blood of His servants,
And will render vengeance on His adversaries,
And will atone for His land and His people.”

44Then Moses came and spoke all the words of this song in the hearing of the people, he and Joshua the son of Nun. 45When Moses had finished speaking all these words to all [the people of] Israel, 46he said to them, “Take to heart all the words of warning which I am speaking to you today; and you shall command your children to observe them carefully—to do all the words of this law. 47“For it is not an empty or trivial matter for you; indeed it is your [very] life. By [honoring and obeying] this word you will live long in the land, which you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”

48And the LORD said to Moses that very same day, 49“Go up to this mountain of the Abarim, Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab opposite Jericho, and look at the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the sons of Israel as a possession. 50Then die on the mountain which you climb, and be gathered to your people [in death], just as Aaron your brother died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people, 51because you broke faith with Me among of the sons of Israel at the waters of Meribah-kadesh, in the Wilderness of Zin, and because you did not treat Me as holy among of the sons of Israel. 52“For you shall see the land opposite you from a distance, but you shall not go there, into the land which I am giving to the children of Israel.”

Deuteronomy 33
The Blessing Of Moses

1This is the blessing with which Moses the man of God blessed the sons of Israel before his death. 2He said,
“The LORD came from Sinai,
And dawned on them from Seir;
He shone forth from Mount Paran,
And He came from among ten thousand holy ones;
At His right hand was a flaming fire, a law, for them.
3“Indeed, He loves His people;
All Your holy ones are in Your hand.
They followed in Your steps;
They accept and receive direction from You.
4“Moses commanded us with a law,
As a possession for the assembly of Jacob.
5“The LORD was King in Jeshurun (Israel),
When the heads of the people were gathered,
The tribes of Israel together.
6“May [the tribe of] Reuben live and not die out,
But let his men be few.”

7And [Moses said] this of Judah:
“Hear, O LORD, the voice of Judah,
And bring him to his people.
With his hands he contended for them,
And may You be a help against his enemies.”

8Of Levi he said,
“Your Thummim and Your Urim belong to Your godly man [Aaron],
Whom You tested and proved at Massah,
With whom You contended at the waters of Meribah;
9Who said of his father and mother,
‘I did not consider them’;
Nor did he acknowledge his brothers,
Nor did he regard his own sons,
For the priests observed Your word,
And kept Your covenant.
10“The priests shall teach Your ordinances (judgments) to Jacob,
And Your law to Israel.
They shall put incense before You,
And whole burnt offerings on Your altar.
11“O LORD, bless Levi’s substance (ability),
And accept and take pleasure in the work of his hands;
Crush and shatter the loins of those who rise up against him,
And of those who hate him, so that they do not rise again.”

12Of Benjamin he said,
“May the beloved of the LORD dwell in safety by Him;
He shields and covers him all the day long,
And he dwells between His shoulders.”

13And of Joseph he said,
“Blessed by the LORD be his land,
With the precious things of heaven, with the dew,
And from the deep water that lies beneath,
14With the precious fruits of the sun,
And with the precious produce of the months.
15“With the best things of the ancient mountains,
And with the precious things of the everlasting hills,
16With the precious things of the earth and its fullness,
And the favor and goodwill of Him who dwelt in the bush.
Let these blessings come upon the head of Joseph,
And upon the crown of the head of him who was distinguished [as a prince] among his brothers.
17“His majesty is like a firstborn young bull,
And his horns like the horns of the wild ox;
With them he will gore the peoples,
All of them together, to the ends of the earth.
And those are the ten thousands of Ephraim,
And those are the thousands of Manasseh.”

18Of Zebulun he said,
“Rejoice, Zebulun, in your interests abroad,
And, Issachar, in your tents [at home].
19“They will call the peoples to the mountain (Mount Carmel);
There they will offer sacrifices of righteousness;
For they will draw out the abundance of the seas,
And the hidden treasures of the sand.”

20Of Gad he said,
“Blessed is the one who enlarges Gad;
He lurks like a lioness,
And tears the arm and the crown of the head.
21“He selected the best [land] for himself,
For there the leader’s portion was reserved;
Yet he came with the leaders of the people;
He carried out the justice (righteous will) of the LORD,
And His ordinances (judgments) with Israel.”

22Of Dan he said,
“Dan is a lion’s cub,
That leaps forth from Bashan.”

23Of Naphtali he said,
“O Naphtali, satisfied with favor,
And full of the blessing of the LORD,
Take possession of the sea [of Galilee] and the south.”

24Of Asher he said,
“More blessed than sons is Asher;
May he be favored by his brothers,
And may he dip his foot in oil.
25“Your strongholds will be iron and bronze,
And as your days are, so will your strength, your rest and security be.
26“There is none like the God of Jeshurun (Israel),
Who rides the heavens to your help,
And through the skies in His majestic glory.
27“The eternal God is your refuge and dwelling place,
And underneath are the everlasting arms;
He drove out the enemy from before you,
And said, ‘Destroy!’
28“So Israel dwells in safety and security,
The fountain of Jacob alone and secluded,
In a land of grain and new wine;
His heavens also drop down dew.
29“Happy and blessed are you, O Israel;
Who is like you, a people saved by the LORD,
The Shield of your help,
And the Sword of your majesty!
Your enemies will cringe before you,
And you will tread on their high places [tramping down their idolatrous altars].”

Deuteronomy 34
The Death Of Moses

1Now Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is opposite Jericho. And the LORD showed him all the land, from Gilead to Dan, 2and all Naphtali and the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah to the western sea (Mediterranean Sea), 3and the Negev (South country) and the plain in the Valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees, as far as Zoar. 4Then the LORD said to him, “This is the land which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, ‘I will give it to your descendants.’ I have let you see it with your eyes, but you shall not go over there.” 5So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the LORD. 6And He buried him in the valley in the land of Moab, opposite Beth-peor; but no man knows where his burial place is to this day. 7Although Moses was a hundred and twenty years old when he died, his eyesight was not dim, nor his natural strength abated. 8So the sons of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab for thirty days; then the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.

9Now Joshua the son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands on him; so the sons of Israel listened to him and did as the LORD commanded Moses. 10Since that time no prophet has risen in Israel like Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face, 11[none equal to him] in all the signs and wonders which the LORD sent him to perform in the land of Egypt against Pharaoh, all his servants, and all his land, 12and in all the mighty power and all the great and terrible deeds which Moses performed in the sight of all Israel.

Joshua 1
God’s Commission To Joshua

1Now it happened after the death of Moses the servant of the LORD, that the LORD spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ servant (attendant), saying, 2“Moses My servant is dead; now therefore arise [to take his place], cross over this Jordan, you and all this people, into the land which I am giving to them, to the sons of Israel. 3I have given you every place on which the sole of your foot treads, just as I promised to Moses. 4From the wilderness [of Arabia in the south] and this Lebanon [in the north], even as far as the great river, the river Euphrates [in the east], all the land of the Hittites (Canaan), and as far as the Great [Mediterranean] Sea toward the west shall be your territory. 5No man will [be able to] stand before you [to oppose you] as long as you live. Just as I was [present] with Moses, so will I be with you; I will not fail you or abandon you. 6Be strong and confident and courageous, for you will give this people as an inheritance the land which I swore to their fathers (ancestors) to give them. 7Only be strong and very courageous; be careful to do [everything] in accordance with the entire law which Moses My servant commanded you; do not turn from it to the right or to the left, so that you may prosper and be successful wherever you go. 8This Book of the Law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall read [and meditate on] it day and night, so that you may be careful to do [everything] in accordance with all that is written in it; for then you will make your way prosperous, and then you will be successful. 9“Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous! Do not be terrified or dismayed (intimidated), for the LORD your God is with you wherever you go.”

Joshua Assumes Command 10Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 11“Go throughout the camp and command the people, saying, ‘Prepare your provisions, for within three days you are to cross this [river] Jordan, to go in to take possession of the land which the LORD your God is giving you to possess [as an inheritance].’”

12To the Reubenites and to the Gadites and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua said, 13“Remember the word which Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, ‘The LORD your God is giving you rest (peace) and will give you this land [east of the Jordan].’ 14Your wives, your children, and your cattle shall [be allowed to] stay in the land which Moses gave you on this [eastern] side of the Jordan, but you shall go across [the river] before your brothers (the other tribes) armed for battle, all your brave warriors, and you shall help them [conquer and take possession of their land], 15until the LORD gives your brothers rest, as He has given you, and they also take possession of the land which the LORD your God is giving them. Then you shall [be allowed to] return to your own land, and take possession of that which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise.”

16They answered Joshua, saying, “All that you have commanded us we will do, and wherever you send us we will go. 17Just as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey you; only may the LORD your God be with you as He was with Moses. 18“Any man who rebels against your command and does not obey everything that you command him, shall be put to death; only be strong and courageous.”

Joshua 2
Rahab Shelters Spies

1Joshua the son of Nun sent two men as scouts secretly from Shittim, saying, “Go, view the land, especially Jericho [the walled city].” So they went and came to the house of a prostitute named Rahab, and lodged there. 2Now the king of Jericho was told, “Behold, men from the sons of Israel have come here tonight to spy and search out the land.” 3So the king of Jericho sent word to Rahab, saying, “Bring out the men who have come to you, who entered your house, because they have come [as spies] to search out all the land.” 4But the woman had taken the two men and hidden them; so she said, “Yes, two men came to me, but I did not know where they were from. 5“When it was time to close the [city] gate at dark, the men left; I do not know where they went. Pursue them quickly, for [if you do] you will overtake them.” 6But [in fact] she had brought the scouts up to the roof and had hidden them under the stalks of flax which she had laid in order on the roof [to dry]. 7So the [king’s] men pursued them on the road to the Jordan as far as the fords [east of Jericho]; as soon as the pursuers had gone out after them, the gate [of the city] was shut.

8Now before the two men lay down [to sleep], Rahab came up to them on the roof, 9and she said to the men, “I know that the LORD has given you the land, and that the terror and dread of you has fallen on us, and that all the inhabitants of the land have melted [in despair] because of you. 10For we have heard how the LORD dried up the water of the Red Sea for you when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan [on the east], to Sihon and Og, whom you utterly destroyed. 11When we heard it, our hearts melted [in despair], and a [fighting] spirit no longer remained in any man because of you; for the LORD your God, He is God in heaven above and on earth beneath. 12And now, please swear [an oath] to me by the LORD, since I have shown you kindness, that you also will show kindness to my father’s household (family), and give me a pledge of truth and faithfulness, 13and spare my father and my mother and my brothers and my sisters, along with everyone who belongs to them, and let us all live.” 14So the men said to her, “Our lives for yours if you do not tell [anyone about] this business of ours; then when the LORD gives us the land we will show you kindness and faithfulness [and keep our agreement with you].”

The Promise to Rahab 15Then she let them down by a rope through the window, for her house was built into the city wall, so that she was living on the wall. 16And she said to them, “Go [west] to the hill country, so that the pursuers [who have headed east] will not encounter you; hide yourselves there for three days until the pursuers return. Then afterward you can go your way.” 17The men said to her, “We shall be blameless and free from this oath which you have made us swear, 18unless, when we come into the land, you tie this cord of scarlet thread in the window through which you let us down, and bring into the house your father and your mother and your brothers and all your father’s household [so that they will be safe]. 19But if anyone goes out the doors of your house into the street, his blood shall be on his own head [that is, his own responsibility], and we shall be blameless and free [from our oath]; however, if a hand is laid on anyone who is with you in the house, his blood shall be on our head. 20“But if you tell [anyone] this business of ours, we shall be blameless and free from the oath which you made us swear.” 21She said, “According to your words, so be it.” Then Rahab sent them off, and they departed; and she tied the scarlet cord in the window.

22They left and went [on their way] to the hill country [west of Jericho], and stayed there [hidden in the caves] three days until the pursuers returned. The pursuers had searched all along the road but had not found them. 23Then the two men turned back and came down from the hill country and crossed over [the Jordan] and came to Joshua the son of Nun [at Shittim], and told him everything that had happened to them. 24They said to Joshua, “Certainly the LORD has given all the land into our hands; for all the inhabitants of the land have melted [in despair] because of us.”

Joshua 3
Israel Crosses The Jordan

1Joshua got up early in the morning; then he and all the children of Israel set out from Shittim and came to the Jordan, and they spent the night there before they crossed [the river]. 2And it happened at the end of three days that the officers went throughout the camp, 3and they commanded the people, “When you see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God being carried by the Levitical priests, then you shall set out from where you are and follow it. 4“However, there shall be a distance between you and it of about 2,000 cubits (3,000 ft.) by measurement. Do not come near it, so that you may [be able to see the ark and] know the way you are to go, for you have not passed this way before.”

5Then Joshua said to the people, “Sanctify yourselves [for His purpose], for tomorrow the LORD will do wonders (miracles) among you.” 6Joshua said to the priests, “Take up the ark of the covenant and cross over [the river] ahead of the people.” So they took up the ark of the covenant and went on ahead of the people.

7The LORD said to Joshua, “This day I will begin to magnify and exalt you in the sight of all Israel, so that they may know that just as I was with Moses, I will [also] be with you. 8“You shall command the priests who carry the ark of the covenant, saying, ‘When you come to the edge of the waters of the Jordan, you shall stand still in the Jordan.’” 9Joshua said to the Israelites, “Come here, and listen to the words of the LORD your God.” 10Joshua said, “By this you shall know that the living God is among you, and that He will, without fail, drive out from before you the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Hivite, the Perizzite, the Girgashite, the Amorite, and the Jebusite. 11Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth is crossing over ahead of you [leading the way] into the Jordan. 12So now take for yourselves twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one man from each tribe. 13“When the soles of the feet of the priests who carry the ark of the LORD, the Lord of all the earth, [come to] rest in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan flowing down from above will be cut off, and they will stand in one mass [of water].”

14So when the people set out from their tents to cross over the Jordan with the priests who were carrying the ark of the covenant before the people, 15and when those who were carrying the ark came up to the Jordan, and the feet of the priests carrying the ark were submerged at the edge of the water (for the Jordan overflows all of its banks throughout the time of harvest), 16the waters which were flowing down from above stopped and rose up in one mass a great distance away at Adam, the city that is beside Zarethan. Those [waters] flowing downward toward the sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, were completely cut off. So the people crossed [the river] opposite Jericho. 17And while all [the people of] Israel crossed over on dry ground, the priests who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan [riverbed], until all the nation had finished crossing over the Jordan.
Joshua 4
Memorial Stones From Jordan

1So it was when all the nation had finished crossing the Jordan, the LORD said to Joshua, 2“Take for yourselves the twelve men [chosen] from among the people, one man from each tribe, 3and command them, ‘Pick up for yourselves twelve stones [one each] from here out of the midst of the Jordan, from the place where the priests’ feet are standing firm; carry them over with you and lay them down at the place where you will spend the night tonight.’” 4Then Joshua called the twelve men whom he had appointed from the sons of Israel, one man from each tribe; 5and Joshua said to them, “Cross over again to the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of the Jordan, and each of you take up a stone on his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel, 6so that this may be a sign among you; when your children ask later, ‘What do these stones mean to you?’ 7then you shall say to them that the waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; when it crossed the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut off. So these stones shall become a memorial for Israel forever.”

8So the [twelve men chosen from the] sons of Israel did as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst of the Jordan, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel, just as the LORD had spoken to Joshua; and they carried them over with them to the place where they were spending the night and put them down there. 9Then Joshua set up [a second monument of] twelve stones in the midst of the Jordan at the place where the feet of the priests who carried the ark of the covenant were standing, and they are there to this day. 10For the priests who carried the ark were standing in the midst of the Jordan until everything was finished that the LORD had commanded Joshua to tell the people, in accordance with everything that Moses had commanded Joshua. The people hurried and crossed [the dry riverbed]; 11and when all the people had finished crossing, the ark of the LORD and the priests crossed over in the presence of the people. 12The sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and half the tribe of Manasseh crossed over armed for battle before the [other] sons of Israel, just as Moses had spoken to them; 13about 40,000 [men] armed and equipped for war crossed for battle before the LORD to the desert plains of Jericho.

14On that day the LORD magnified and exalted Joshua in the sight of all Israel; so they feared him [with profound awe and reverence], just as they had feared Moses all the days of his life.

15Now the LORD said to Joshua, 16“Order the priests carrying the ark of the Testimony to come up out of the Jordan.” 17So Joshua commanded the priests, saying, “Come up out of the Jordan.” 18When the priests who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD had come up from the midst of the Jordan, and the soles of their feet were raised up to the dry land, the waters of the Jordan returned to their place, and flowed over all its banks as before.

19Now the people came up from the Jordan on the tenth [day] of the first month and encamped at Gilgal on the eastern border of Jericho. 20And those twelve stones which they had taken from the Jordan, Joshua set up in Gilgal. 21He said to the sons of Israel, “When your children ask their fathers in time to come, ‘What do these stones mean?’ 22then you shall let your children know, ‘Israel crossed this Jordan on dry ground.’ 23For the LORD your God dried up the waters of the Jordan for you until you crossed over, just as the LORD your God did to the Red Sea, which He dried up before us until we had crossed; 24so that all the peoples of the earth may know [without any doubt] and acknowledge that the hand of the LORD is mighty and extraordinarily powerful, so that you will fear the LORD your God [and obey and worship Him with profound awe and reverence] forever.”

Joshua 5
Israel Is Circumcised

1Now it happened when all the kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan to the west, and all the kings of the Canaanites who were by the sea, heard that the LORD had dried up the waters of the Jordan before the Israelites until they had crossed over, their hearts melted [in despair], and there was no [fighting] spirit in them any longer because of the Israelites [and what God had done for them].

2At that time the LORD said to Joshua, “Make for yourself flint knives and circumcise the [new generation of the] sons of Israel as [was done] before.” 3So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the sons of Israel at Gibeath-haaraloth. 4This is the reason why Joshua circumcised them: all the people who came out of Egypt who were males, all the men of war, had died in the wilderness along the way after they left Egypt. 5All the males who came out were circumcised, but all the males who were born in the wilderness on the way as they left Egypt had not been circumcised. 6For the Israelites walked forty years in the wilderness, until all the nation, that is, the men of war who came out of Egypt, died because they did not listen to the voice of the LORD; to them the LORD had sworn [an oath] that He would not let them see the land which He had promised to their fathers to give us, a land [of abundance] flowing with milk and honey. 7So it was their uncircumcised sons whom He raised up in their place, whom Joshua circumcised, because circumcision had not been performed on the way.

8Then, when they had finished circumcising all [the males of] the nation, they stayed in their places in the camp until they were healed. 9Then the LORD said to Joshua, “This day I have rolled away the reproach (derision, ridicule) of Egypt from you.” So the name of that place is called Gilgal (rolling) to this day.

10While the Israelites camped at Gilgal they observed the Passover on the evening of the fourteenth day of the month on the desert plains of Jericho. 11On the day after Passover, on that very day, they ate some of the produce of the land, unleavened bread, and roasted grain. 12And the manna ceased on the day after they had eaten some of the produce of the land, so that the Israelites no longer had manna, but they ate some of the produce of the land of Canaan during that year.

13Now when Joshua was by Jericho, he looked up, and behold, a man was standing opposite him with his drawn sword in his hand, and Joshua went to him and said to him, “Are you for us or for our adversaries?” 14He said, “No; rather I have come now as captain of the army of the LORD.” Then Joshua fell with his face toward the earth and bowed down, and said to him, “What does my lord have to say to his servant?” 15The captain of the LORD’S army said to Joshua, “Remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you are standing is holy (set apart to the LORD).” And Joshua did so.

Joshua 6
The Conquest Of Jericho

1Now Jericho [a fortified city with high walls] was tightly closed because [of the people’s fear] of the sons of Israel; no one went out or came in. 2The LORD said to Joshua, “See, I have given Jericho into your hand, with its king and the mighty warriors. 3Now you shall march around the city, all the men of war circling the city once. You shall do this [once each day] for six days. 4Also, seven priests shall carry seven trumpets [made] of rams’ horns ahead of the ark; then on the seventh day you shall march around the city seven times, and the priests shall blow the trumpets. 5“When they make a long blast with the ram’s horn, and when you hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall cry out with a great shout (battle cry); and the wall of the city will fall down in its place, and the people shall go up, each man [going] straight ahead [climbing over the rubble].”

6So Joshua the son of Nun called for the priests and said to them, “Take up the ark of the covenant, and have seven priests carry seven trumpets made of rams’ horns ahead of the ark of the LORD.” 7He said to the people, “Go forward! March around the city, and let the armed men go ahead of the ark of the LORD.” 8And it was so, that when Joshua had spoken to the people, the seven priests carrying the seven trumpets made of rams’ horns went on before the LORD and blew the trumpets; then the ark of the covenant of the LORD went behind them. 9The armed men went in front of the priests who blew the trumpets, and the rear guard came after the ark, while the priests continued to blow the trumpets. 10But Joshua commanded the people, “You shall not shout [the battle cry] nor let your voice be heard nor let a word come out of your mouth, until the day I tell you to shout. Then you shall shout!” 11So Joshua had the ark of the LORD taken around the city [on the first day], circling it once; then they came back into the camp and spent the night in the camp.

12Then Joshua got up early in the morning [on the second day], and the priests took up the ark of the LORD. 13The seven priests carrying the seven trumpets made of rams’ horns ahead of the ark of the LORD went on continually, blowing the trumpets; and the armed men went ahead of them and the rear guard came after the ark of the LORD, while the priests continued to blow the trumpets. 14On the second day they marched around the city once, and returned to the camp; they did this for six days.

15Then on the seventh day they got up early at daybreak and marched around the city in the same way seven times; only on that day they marched around the city seven times. 16And the seventh time, when the priests had blown the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, “Shout! For the LORD has given you the city. 17The city and everything that is in it shall be under the ban [that is, designated to be destroyed as a form of tribute] to the LORD; only Rahab the prostitute and all [the people] who are with her in her house shall [be allowed to] live, because she hid and protected the messengers (scouts) whom we sent. 18But as for you, keep yourselves [away] from the things under the ban [which are to be destroyed], so that you do not covet them and take some of the things under the ban [for personal gain], and put the camp of Israel under the ban (doomed to destruction), and bring disaster upon it. 19“All the silver and gold and articles of bronze and iron are holy (consecrated) to the LORD; they shall go into the treasury of the LORD.” 20So the people shouted [the battle cry], and the priests blew the trumpets. When the people heard the sound of the trumpet, they raised a great shout and the wall [of Jericho] fell down, so that the sons of Israel went up into the city, every man straight ahead [climbing over the rubble], and they overthrew the city. 21Then they utterly destroyed everything that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old, and ox and sheep and donkey, with the edge of the sword.

22But Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land, “Go into the prostitute’s house and bring the woman and all that she has out of there, as you have sworn to her.” 23So the young men, the spies, went in and brought out Rahab and her father and her mother and her brothers and everything that she had; they also brought out all her relatives and allowed them to stay outside the camp of Israel [at Gilgal during the time required for ceremonial cleansing]. 24Then they completely burned the city and everything that was in it. They put only the silver and the gold, and the articles of bronze and of iron, into the treasury of the house (tabernacle) of the LORD. 25So Joshua spared Rahab the prostitute, with her father’s household and everything that she had; and she has lived among Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers (scouts) whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.

26Then Joshua made them take an oath at that time, saying, “Cursed before the LORD is the man who rises up and rebuilds this city, Jericho; with the loss of his firstborn he shall lay its foundation, and with the loss of his youngest son he shall set up its gates.” 27So the LORD was with Joshua, and his fame was in all the land.
Joshua 7
Israel Is Defeated At Ai

1But the sons of Israel acted unfaithfully and violated their obligation in regard to the things [off limits] under the ban [those things belonging to the LORD], for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, from the tribe of Judah, took some of the things under the ban [for personal gain]. Therefore the anger of the LORD burned against the Israelites.

2Now Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is near Beth-aven, east of Bethel, and said to them, “Go up and spy out the land.” So the men went up and spied out Ai. 3Then they returned to Joshua and said to him, “Do not make all the people go up [to fight]; have only about two thousand or three thousand men go up and attack Ai; do not make the entire army go up there, for they [of Ai] are few.” 4So about three thousand men from the sons of Israel went up there, but they fled [in retreat] from the men of Ai. 5The men of Ai killed about thirty-six of Israel’s men, and chased them from the gate as far as [the bluffs of] Shebarim and struck them down as they descended [the steep pass], so the hearts of the people melted [in despair and began to doubt God’s promise] and became like water (disheartened).

6Then Joshua tore his clothes and fell face downward on the ground before the ark of the LORD until evening, he and the elders of Israel; and [with great sorrow] they put dust on their heads. 7Joshua said, “Alas, O Lord GOD, why have You brought this people across the Jordan at all, only to hand us over to the Amorites, to destroy us? If only we had been willing to live beyond the Jordan! 😯 Lord, what can I say now that [the army of] Israel has turned back [in retreat and fled] before their enemies? 9“For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land will hear about it, and will surround us and cut off our name from the earth. And what will You do for Your great name [to keep it from dishonor]?”

10So the LORD said to Joshua, “Get up! Why is it that you have fallen on your face? 11Israel has sinned; they have also transgressed My covenant which I commanded them [to keep]. They have even taken some of the things under the ban, and they have both stolen and denied [the theft]. Moreover, they have also put the stolen objects among their own things. 12That is why the soldiers of Israel could not stand [and defend themselves] before their enemies; they turned their backs [and ran] before them, because they have become accursed. I will not be with you anymore unless you destroy the things under the ban from among you. 13“Rise up! Consecrate the people and say, ‘Consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, for thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: “There are things under the ban among you, O Israel. You cannot stand [victorious] before your enemies until you remove the things under the ban from among you.” 14‘In the morning you shall come forward by your tribes. And it shall be that the tribe which the LORD chooses by lot shall come forward by families, and the family which the LORD chooses shall come forward by [separate] households, and the household which the LORD chooses shall come forward man by man. 15‘It shall be that the one who is chosen with the things under the ban shall be [killed and his body] burned with fire, he and all that belongs to him, because he has transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he has done a disgraceful and disobedient thing in Israel.’”

The Sin of Achan 16So Joshua got up early in the morning and had Israel come forward by tribes, and the tribe of Judah was chosen [by lot]. 17He had the families of Judah come forward, and the family of the Zerahites was chosen; and he had the family of the Zerahites come forward man by man, and Zabdi was chosen. 18He brought his household forward man by man; and Achan the son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was chosen. 19Then Joshua said to Achan, “My son, I implore you, give glory to the LORD, the God of Israel, and give praise to Him [in recognition of His righteous judgments]; and tell me now what you have done. Do not hide it from me.” 20So Achan answered Joshua and said, “In truth, I have sinned against the LORD, the God of Israel, and this is what I have done: 21when I saw among the spoils [in Jericho] a beautiful robe from Shinar (southern Babylon) and two hundred shekels of silver and a bar of gold weighing fifty shekels, I wanted them and took them. Behold, they are hidden in the ground inside my tent, with the silver underneath.”

22So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent; and they saw the stolen objects hidden in his tent, with the silver underneath. 23And they took them from the tent and brought them to Joshua and to all the sons of Israel, and spread them out before the LORD. 24Then Joshua and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, the silver, the [royal] robe, the bar of gold, his sons, his daughters, his oxen, his donkeys, his sheep, his tent, and everything that he had; and they brought them up to the Valley of Achor (Disaster). 25Joshua said, “Why have you brought disaster on us? The LORD will bring you disaster this day.” Then all Israel stoned them [to death] with stones; afterward they burned their bodies in the fire. 26Then they piled up over him a great heap of stones that remains to this day. Then the LORD turned from the fierceness of His anger. Therefore the name of that place has been called the Valley of Achor (Disaster) to this day.

Joshua 8
The Conquest Of Ai

1Now the LORD said to Joshua, “Do not fear or be dismayed (intimidated). Take all the men of war with you and set out, go up to Ai; see, I have given the king of Ai, his people, his city, and his land into your hand. 2“You shall do [the same] to Ai and its king as you did to Jericho and its king; [except that] you shall take only its spoil and its cattle as plunder for yourselves. Set up an ambush for the city behind it [on the west side].”

3So Joshua set out with all the people of war to go up against Ai; then Joshua chose thirty thousand valiant men, and sent them out at night. 4He commanded them, saying, “Listen closely, you are going to lie in wait and ambush the city from behind it. Do not go very far away from the city, but all of you be ready. 5Then I and all the people who are with me will approach the city. And when they come out to meet us [for battle] as [they did] the first time, we will run away from them. 6They will come out after us until we have lured them away from the city, because they will say, ‘They are running from us as [they did] before.’ So we will run from them. 7Then you will emerge from the ambush and take possession of the city, for the LORD your God will hand it over to you. 8“When you have taken the city, you shall set it on fire; you shall do [exactly] as the LORD commanded. See, I have commanded you.” 9So Joshua sent them off, and they went to the place for the ambush and stayed [hidden] between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai; but Joshua spent that night among the people [in Gilgal].

10Now Joshua got up early in the morning and assembled the people, and went up with the elders of Israel before the people to Ai. 11Then all the fighting men who were with him went up and advanced and arrived in front of the city, and camped on the north side of Ai. Now there was a ravine between them and Ai. 12And Joshua took about five thousand men and set them in ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city. 13So they stationed the people, all the army—the main encampment that was north of the city, and their rear guard on the west side of the city—and Joshua spent that night in the valley. 14Now when the king [and the people] of Ai saw it, the men of the city hurried and got up early and went out to meet Israel in battle, the king and all his people at the appointed [time and] place before the desert plain (the Arabah). But he did not know that there was an ambush against him [waiting] behind the city [on the west side]. 15So Joshua and all Israel pretended to be defeated by them, and ran toward the wilderness. 16Then all the people who were in the city were called together to pursue them, and they pursued Joshua and were lured away from the city. 17Not a man was left in Ai or Bethel who had not gone out after Israel; so they left the city open and unguarded and they pursued Israel.

18Then the LORD said to Joshua, “Reach out with the spear that is in your hand [and point it] toward Ai, for I will give it into your hand.” So Joshua reached out with the spear in his hand [and pointed it] toward the city. 19The [men in] ambush emerged quickly from their [hiding] place, and when Joshua stretched out his hand they ran and entered the city and captured it, and quickly set the city on fire. 20When the men of Ai turned back and looked, behold, the smoke of the city was ascending toward the sky, and they had no opportunity to run this way or that way. Then the people who had been running to the wilderness turned back toward the pursuers. 21When Joshua and all Israel saw that the [men in] ambush had taken the city and that the smoke of the city was ascending, they turned back and struck down the men of Ai. 22Then the others came out of the city to confront the men of Ai [as they returned], so that they were trapped in the midst of Israel, some on this side and some on that side; then Israel struck them until none of them survived or escaped. 23But they took the king of Ai alive and brought him to Joshua.

24When Israel had finished killing all the inhabitants of Ai in the field in the wilderness where they pursued them, and they had all fallen by the edge of the sword until they were destroyed, then all Israel returned to Ai and struck it with the edge of the sword. 25And all who fell that day, both men and women, were twelve thousand, all the people of Ai. 26For Joshua did not withdraw his hand with which he stretched out the spear until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai. 27Israel took only the livestock and the spoil of that city as plunder for themselves, according to the word of the LORD which He had commanded Joshua. 28So Joshua burned Ai and made it a rubbish heap forever, a desolation until this day. 29He hanged [the body of] the king of Ai on a tree [leaving it there] until evening; at sunset Joshua gave a command and they took the body down from the tree and dumped it at the entrance of the city gate, and piled a great heap of stones over it that stands to this day.

30Then Joshua built an altar to the LORD, the God of Israel, on Mount Ebal, 31just as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded the sons of Israel, as it is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, an altar of uncut stones on which no one has wielded an iron tool; and they offered on it burnt offerings to the LORD, and sacrificed peace offerings. 32And there, in the presence of the sons of Israel, Joshua wrote on the stones a copy of the Law of Moses which Moses had written. 33All Israel, the stranger as well as the native born [among them], with their elders and officers and their judges, stood on either side of the ark before the Levitical priests who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD. Half of them stood in front of Mount Gerizim and half of them in front of Mount Ebal, just as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded at first to bless the people of Israel. 34Then afterward Joshua read all the words of the law, the blessing and curse, according to all that is written in the Book of the Law. 35There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded which Joshua did not read before the entire assembly of Israel, including the women and the children and the foreigners who were living among them.

Joshua 9
Guile Of The Gibeonites

1Now when all the kings who were beyond the Jordan, in the hill country and in the lowland [at the western edge of the hills of Judea], and all along the coast of the Great [Mediterranean] Sea toward Lebanon, the Hittite and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite, heard of this [army and its victories over Jericho and Ai], 2they gathered together with one purpose to fight with Joshua and with Israel.

3But when the people of Gibeon [the Hivites] heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai, 4they too acted craftily and cunningly, and set out and took along provisions, but took worn-out sacks on their donkeys, and wineskins (leather bottles) that were worn out and split open and patched together, 5and worn-out and patched sandals on their feet, and worn-out clothes; and all their supply of food was dry and had turned to crumbs. 6They went to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal and said to him and the men of Israel, “We have come from a far country; so now, make a covenant (treaty) with us.” 7But the men of Israel said to the Hivites, “Perhaps you are living within our land; how then can we make a covenant (treaty) with you?” 8They said to Joshua, “We are your servants.” Then Joshua said to them, “Who are you, and where do you come from?” 9They said to him, “Your servants have come from a country that is very far away because of the fame of the LORD your God; for we have heard the news about Him and all [the remarkable things] that He did in Egypt, 10and everything that He did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon the king of Heshbon and to Og the king of Bashan who lived in Ashtaroth. 11“So our elders and all the residents of our country said to us, ‘Take provisions for the journey and go to meet the sons of Israel and say to them, “We are your servants; now make a covenant (treaty) with us.”’ 12This bread of ours was hot (fresh) when we took it along as our provision from our houses on the day we left to come to you; now look, it is dry and has turned to crumbs. 13“These wineskins which we filled were new, and look, they are split; our clothes and our sandals are worn out because of the very long journey [that we had to make].” 14So the men [of Israel] took some of their own provisions [and offered them in friendship], and [foolishly] did not ask for the counsel of the LORD. 15Joshua made peace with them and made a covenant (treaty) with them, to let them live; and the leaders of the congregation [of Israel] swore an oath to them.

16It happened that three days after they had made a covenant (treaty) with them, the Israelites heard that they were [actually] their neighbors and that they were living among them. 17Then the sons of Israel set out and came to their cities on the third day. Now the cities [of the Hivites] were Gibeon and Chephirah and Beeroth and Kiriath-jearim. 18But the sons of Israel did not strike them because the leaders of the congregation had sworn to them by the LORD the God of Israel [to spare them]. And all the congregation murmured [expressing great dissatisfaction] against the leaders. 19But all the leaders said to the whole congregation, “We have sworn to them by the LORD, the God of Israel, so now we cannot touch them. 20“This [is what] we will do to them: we will let them live, so that the wrath [of God] does not come upon us for [violating] the oath which we have sworn to them.” 21The leaders said to them, “Let them live [as our slaves].” So they became the cutters and gatherers of firewood and water carriers for the entire congregation, just as the leaders had said of them.

22Joshua called the [Hivite] men and said, “Why did you deceive us, saying, ‘We live very far away from you,’ when [in fact] you live among us? 23“Now therefore, you are cursed, and you shall always be slaves, both cutters and gatherers of firewood and water carriers for the house of my God.” 24They replied to Joshua and said, “Because your servants were told in no uncertain terms that the LORD your God commanded His servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the land’s inhabitants before you, we feared greatly for our lives because of you, and so we did this [deceptive] thing. 25“Now look, we are in your hands; do to us as it seems good and right in your sight.” 26So that is what he did to them; he rescued them from the hands of the Israelites and they did not kill them. 27Now on that day Joshua made them cutters and gatherers of firewood and water carriers for the congregation and for the altar of the LORD, to this day, in the place which He would choose.

Joshua 10
Five Kings Attack Gibeon

1When Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had captured Ai, and had utterly destroyed it—as he had done to Jericho and its king, so he had done to Ai and its king—and that the residents of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were [living] among them, 2he [and his people] feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, like one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all its men were mighty. 3So Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent word to Hoham king of Hebron, and to Piram king of Jarmuth, to Japhia king of Lachish, and to Debir king of Eglon, saying, 4“Come up to me and help me, and let us attack Gibeon [with a combined army], because it has made peace with Joshua and with the sons (people) of Israel.” 5Then the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon, gathered together and went up, they with all their armies, and they camped by Gibeon and fought against it.

6So the men of Gibeon sent word to Joshua at the camp in Gilgal, saying, “Do not abandon your servants; come up to us quickly and save us and help us, for all [five of] the kings of the Amorites who live in the hill country have assembled against us.” 7So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he and all the people of war with him, and all the men of valor. 8The LORD said to Joshua, “Do not fear them, because I have given them into your hand; not one of them shall stand before you.” 9So Joshua came upon them suddenly, [surprising them] by marching [uphill] all night from Gilgal. 10And the LORD caused them to panic and be confused before Israel, and He struck them dead in a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goes up to Beth-horon and struck them as far as Azekah and Makkedah. 11As they fled before Israel, while they were at the descent of Beth-horon, the LORD threw down large stones [of hail] from heaven on them as far as Azekah, and they died. More [Amorites] died because of the hailstones than those whom the sons of Israel killed with the sword.

12Then Joshua spoke to the LORD on the day when the LORD handed over the Amorites to the sons of Israel, and Joshua said in the sight of Israel,
“Sun, stand still at Gibeon,
And moon, in the Valley of Aijalon.”
13So the sun stood still, and the moon stopped,
Until the nation [of Israel] took vengeance upon their enemies.
Is it not written in the Book of Jashar? So the sun stood still in the middle of the sky and was in no hurry to go down for about a whole day. 14There has not been a day like that before it or after it, when the LORD listened to (heeded) the voice of a man; for the LORD was fighting for Israel.

15Then Joshua and all Israel with him returned to the camp at Gilgal.

Victory at Makkedah 16Now these five [Amorite] kings fled and hid themselves in the cave at Makkedah. 17And Joshua was told, “The five kings have been found and are hidden in the cave at Makkedah.” 18Joshua said, “Roll large stones against the mouth of the cave, and assign men by it to guard them, 19but do not stay there yourselves; pursue your enemies and attack them from the rear. Do not allow them to enter their cities, for the LORD your God has given them into your hand.” 20Now when Joshua and the sons of Israel had finished striking the Amorites dead in a very great defeat, until they were wiped out, and the surviving remnant among them had entered the fortified cities, 21all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace. No one uttered a [threatening] word against any of the sons of Israel.

22Then Joshua said, “Open the mouth of the cave and bring out to me those five [Amorite] kings from the cave.” 23They did so, and brought these five [Amorite] kings out of the cave to him—the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon. 24When they brought these kings out to Joshua, Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and told the commanders of the men of war who had gone with him, “Come up close, put your feet on the necks of these kings.” So they came forward and put their feet on the necks [of the five kings]. 25Joshua said to them, “Do not fear or be dismayed (intimidated)! Be strong and courageous, for this is what the LORD will do to all your enemies against whom you [are about to] fight.” 26Then afterward Joshua struck them [with his sword] and put them to death, and he hung them on five trees; and they hung on the trees until evening. 27At sunset Joshua gave a command, and they took the bodies down from the trees and threw them into the cave where the kings had hidden themselves, and placed large stones over the mouth of the cave, [where they remain] to this very day.

28Now Joshua captured Makkedah on that day, and struck it and its king with the edge of the sword; he utterly destroyed it and everyone who was in it. He left no survivor. So he did to the king of Makkedah just as he had done to the king of Jericho.

Joshua’s Conquest of Southern Canaan 29Then Joshua and all Israel with him went on from Makkedah to Libnah, and fought against Libnah. 30The LORD gave it also along with its king into the hands of Israel, and Joshua struck it and every person who was in it with the edge of the sword. He left no survivor in it. So he did to the king of Libnah just as he had done to the king of Jericho.

31And Joshua and all Israel with him moved on from Libnah to Lachish, and they camped by it and fought against it. 32The LORD gave Lachish into the hands of Israel; and Joshua captured it on the second day, and struck it and every person who was in it with the edge of the sword, just as he had done to Libnah.

33Then Horam king of Gezer went up to help Lachish, and Joshua struck him and his people down until he had left him no survivor.

34And Joshua and all Israel with him went on from Lachish to Eglon, and they camped by it and fought against it. 35They captured it on that day and struck it with the edge of the sword; and on that day he utterly destroyed every person who was in it, just as he had done to Lachish.

36Then Joshua and all Israel with him went up from Eglon to Hebron, and they fought against it 37and captured it and struck it and its king and all its cities and all the persons who were in it with the edge of the sword. He left no survivor, just as he had done to Eglon. He utterly destroyed it and every person who was in it.

38Then Joshua and all Israel with him returned to Debir, and fought against it. 39He captured it with its king and all its cities, and they struck them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed every person who was in it. He left no survivor. Just as he had done to Hebron, so Joshua did to Debir and its king, as he had done also to Libnah and its king.

40So Joshua struck all the land, the hill country, the Negev (South country) and the lowland and the slopes [that descend to the Dead Sea] and all their kings. He left no survivor, but he utterly destroyed all who breathed, just as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded. 41Joshua struck them from Kadesh-barnea even as far as Gaza, and all the country of Goshen even as far as Gibeon. 42Joshua captured all these kings and their land at one time, because the LORD, the God of Israel, fought for Israel. 43So Joshua and all Israel with him returned to the camp at Gilgal.

Joshua 11
Northern Canaan Taken

1Then when Jabin king of Hazor heard [of Israel’s other victories] he sent word to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph, 2and to the kings who were in the north, in the hill country, and in the Arabah [the plain] south of Chinnereth (the Sea of Galilee) and in the lowland and on the hills of Dor on the west; 3to the Canaanite in the east and in the west, and to the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the hill country, and the Hivite at the foot of [Mount] Hermon in the land of Mizpeh. 4They went out, they and all their armies with them, as many people as the sand on the seashore, with very many horses and chariots. 5So all these kings met and they came and encamped together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.

6Then the LORD said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid because of them, for tomorrow by this time I am going to hand over all of them slain [by the sword] to Israel; you shall hamstring (disable) their horses and set fire to their chariots.” 7So Joshua and all the people of war with him came against them suddenly by the waters of Merom, and attacked them. 8The LORD handed them over to Israel, who struck them and pursued them as far as Great Sidon and Misrephoth-maim and eastward as far as the Valley of Mizpeh; they struck them down until no survivor was left. 9Joshua did to them as the LORD had told him; he hamstrung (disabled) their horses and set fire to their chariots.

10At that time Joshua turned back and captured Hazor and struck its king dead with the sword; for Hazor previously was the head of all these kingdoms. 11They struck all the people who were in it with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them; there was no one left who breathed. And he set fire to Hazor. 12Joshua captured all the cities of these kings, and all their kings, and he struck them with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them, just as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded. 13But Israel did not burn any of the cities that stood [walled and fortified] on their mounds, except Hazor alone, which Joshua burned. 14The sons of Israel took as their plunder all the spoil of these cities and the cattle; but they struck every man with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them. They left no one alive. 15Just as the LORD had commanded Moses His servant, so Moses had commanded Joshua, and so Joshua did; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD had commanded Moses.

16So Joshua took all this land: the hill country, all the Negev (South country), all the land of Goshen, the lowland, the Arabah [plain], the hill country of Israel and its lowland 17from Mount Halak, that rises toward Seir [in the south], even as far as Baal-gad in the Valley of Lebanon at the foot of Mount Hermon [in the north]. He captured all their kings and struck them and put them to death. 18Joshua waged war with all these kings a long time [at least five years]. 19There was no city that made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites living in Gibeon; they took all the others in battle. 20For it was [the purpose] of the LORD to harden their hearts, to meet Israel in battle so that Israel would utterly destroy them, that they would receive no mercy, but that Israel would destroy them, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.

21Then Joshua came at that time and cut off the Anakim from the hill country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab and from all the hill country of Judah and all the hill country of Israel. Joshua utterly destroyed them with their cities. 22There were no Anakim left in the land of the children of Israel; only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod [of Philistia] some remained. 23So Joshua took the whole land [of Canaan], according to all that the LORD had spoken to Moses, and Joshua gave it as an inheritance to Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. So the land had rest from war.

Joshua 12
Kings Defeated By Israel

1Now these are the kings of the land whom the sons of Israel defeated, and whose land they possessed beyond the Jordan toward the east, from the valley of the [river] Arnon to Mount Hermon, and all the Arabah [plain] to the east: 2Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the [river] Arnon, both the middle of the valley and half of Gilead, and as far as the brook Jabbok, [which is] the border of the sons of Ammon; 3and the Arabah [plain] as far as the Sea of Chinnereth (Galilee) eastward, and as far as the sea of the Arabah, the Salt (Dead) Sea, eastward toward Beth-jeshimoth, and southward to the foot of the slopes of [Mount] Pisgah; 4and the territory of Og king of Bashan, one of the remnant of the Rephaim, who lived at Ashtaroth and at Edrei, 5and ruled over Mount Hermon and Salecah and all of Bashan to the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and over half of Gilead, as far as the border of Sihon king of Heshbon. 6Moses the servant of the LORD and the sons of Israel defeated them; and Moses the servant of the LORD gave their land as a possession to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

7These are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the sons of Israel defeated on the west side of the Jordan, from Baal-gad in the Valley of Lebanon to Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir. Joshua gave their land to the tribes of Israel as a possession according to their divisions, 8in the hill country, in the lowland (foothills), in the Arabah [plain], on the slopes [descending to the Dead Sea], and in the wilderness, and in the Negev (South country)—the [lands of the] Hittite, the Amorite and the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite: 9the king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one; 10the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 11the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; 12the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; 13the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one; 14the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one; 15the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one; 16the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; 17the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; 18the king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one; 19the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one; 20the king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one; 21the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one; 22the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one; 23the king of Dor in the heights of Dor, one; the king of Goiim in Gilgal, one; 24the king of Tirzah, one: in all, thirty-one kings.

Joshua 13
Canaan Divided Among The Tribes

1Now Joshua was old and advanced in years, and the LORD said to him, “You have grown old and advanced in years, and very substantial portions of the land remain to be possessed. 2This is the land that remains: all the regions of the Philistines and all those of the Geshurites; 3from the Shihor [waterway] which is east of Egypt [at the southern end of Canaan], northward to the border of Ekron (all of it regarded as Canaanite); the five rulers of the Philistines: the Gazite, Ashdodite, the Ashkelonite, the Gittite, the Ekronite; and the Avvite 4in the south, all the land of the Canaanite, and Mearah that belongs to the Sidonians, as far as Aphek, to the border of the Amorite; 5and the land of the Gebalite, and all Lebanon, toward the east, from Baal-gad below Mount Hermon to the entrance of Hamath. 6As for all the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim, even all the Sidonians, I will drive them out before Israel; only allot the land to Israel as an inheritance just as I have commanded you. 7“So now, divide this land [west of the Jordan] as an inheritance for the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh.”

8With the other half-tribe [of Manasseh], the Reubenites and the Gadites received their inheritance which Moses gave them beyond the Jordan eastward, just as Moses the servant of the LORD gave to them; 9from Aroer on the edge of the valley of the [river] Arnon, and the city in the middle of the valley, and all the plain of Medeba, as far as Dibon; 10and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, as far as the border of the Ammonites; 11and Gilead, and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan as far as Salecah; 12the entire kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei—he alone was left of the remnant of the Rephaim [giants]—for Moses had struck them and dispossessed them. 13But the sons of Israel did not dispossess the Geshurites or the Maacathites; for Geshur and Maacath live among Israel to this day. 14It was only to the tribe of Levi that Moses gave no [territory as an] inheritance; the offerings by fire to the LORD, the God of Israel, are their inheritance, as He told him.

15So Moses gave an inheritance to the tribe of the sons of Reuben according to their families. 16Their territory was from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the [river] Arnon, and the city which is in the middle of the valley and all the plain by Medeba; 17with Heshbon, and all its cities which are on the plain: Dibon and Bamoth-baal and Beth-baal-meon, 18and Jahaz and Kedemoth and Mephaath, 19and Kiriathaim and Sibmah and Zereth-shahar on the hill of the valley, 20and Beth-peor and the slopes of Pisgah and Beth-jeshimoth, 21even all the cities of the plain and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites who reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses struck down along with the leaders of Midian, Evi and Rekem and Zur and Hur and Reba, the princes of Sihon, who lived in the land. 22The sons of Israel also killed Balaam the son of Beor, the diviner (soothsayer), with the sword among [the rest of] their slain. 23The border of the sons of Reuben was the Jordan. This was the inheritance of the sons of Reuben according to their families, with their cities and villages.

24Moses also gave an inheritance to the tribe of Gad, to the sons of Gad, according to their families. 25Their territory was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the sons of Ammon, as far as Aroer east of Rabbah; 26and from Heshbon as far as Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim, and from Mahanaim as far as the border of Debir; 27and in the valley, Beth-haram and Beth-nimrah and Succoth and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, with the Jordan as a border, as far as the lower end of the Sea of Chinnereth (Galilee) east of the Jordan. 28This is the inheritance of the sons of Gad according to their families, with their cities and their villages.

29Moses also gave an inheritance to the half-tribe of Manasseh; and it was for the half-tribe of the sons of Manasseh according to their families. 30Their region extended from Mahanaim, all Bashan, the entire kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, sixty cities; 31also half of Gilead, with Ashtaroth and Edrei, the cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan; these were for the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh, for half of the sons of Machir according to their families (clans).

32These are the territories which Moses distributed as an inheritance in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan at Jericho to the east. 33But to the tribe of Levi, Moses did not give an inheritance; the LORD, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, as He told them.

Joshua 14
Caleb’s Request

1Now these are the territories which the tribes of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the households of the tribes of Israel apportioned to them as an inheritance, 2by the lot of their inheritance, as the LORD had commanded through Moses, for the nine tribes and the half-tribe. 3For Moses had given an inheritance to the two tribes and the half-tribe beyond the Jordan; but he did not give [any territory as] an inheritance to the Levites among them. 4For the sons of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim, and no portion was given in the land to the Levites except cities in which to live, with their pasture lands for their livestock and for their property. 5The Israelites did just as the LORD had commanded Moses, and they divided the land.

6Then the [tribe of the] sons of Judah approached Joshua in Gilgal, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, “You know the word which the LORD said to Moses the man of God concerning me and you in Kadesh-barnea. 7I was forty years old when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadesh-barnea to scout the land [of Canaan], and I brought a report back to him as it was in my heart. 8My brothers (fellow spies) who went up with me made the heart of the people melt with fear; but I followed the LORD my God completely. 9So Moses swore [an oath to me] on that day, saying, ‘Be assured that the land on which your foot has walked will be an inheritance to you and to your children always, because you have followed the LORD my God completely.’ 10And now, look, the LORD has let me live, just as He said, these forty-five years since the LORD spoke this word to Moses, when Israel wandered in the wilderness; and now, look at me, I am eighty-five years old today. 11I am still as strong today as I was the day Moses sent me; as my strength was then, so is my strength now, for war and for going out and coming in. 12“So now, give me this hill country about which the LORD spoke that day, for you heard on that day that the [giant-like] Anakim were there, with great fortified cities; perhaps the LORD will be with me, and I shall drive them out just as the LORD said.”

13So Joshua blessed him and gave Hebron to Caleb the son of Jephunneh as an inheritance. 14Therefore, Hebron became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this day, because he followed the LORD, the God of Israel, completely. 15The name of Hebron was formerly Kiriath-arba [city of Arba]; for Arba was the greatest man among the [giant-like] Anakim. Then the land had rest from war.

Joshua 15
Territory Of Judah

1Now the lot (allotment) for the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their families reached [southward to] the border of Edom, southward to the wilderness of Zin at its most southern part. 2Their southern border was from the lower end of the Salt (Dead) Sea, from the bay that turns southward. 3Then it proceeded southward to the ascent of Akrabbim and continued along to Zin, and then went by the south of Kadesh-barnea and continued along to Hezron, and went up to Addar and turned about to Karka. 4It continued along to Azmon and proceeded to the Brook of Egypt (Wadi el-Arish), and the border ended at the [Mediterranean] sea. This was their southern border. 5The eastern border was the Salt (Dead) Sea, as far as the mouth of the Jordan. The northern border was from the bay of the sea at the mouth of the Jordan. 6Then the border went up to Beth-hoglah, and continued along north of Beth-arabah, and the border went up to the [landmark of the] stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. 7The border went up to Debir from the Valley of Achor, and turned northward toward Gilgal which is opposite the ascent of Adummim, which is on the south side of the valley; and the border continued on to the waters of En-shemesh and ended at En-rogel. 8Then the border went up by the Valley of Ben-hinnom (son of Hinnom) at the southern slope of the Jebusite [city] (that is, Jerusalem); and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lies before the Valley of Hinnom to the west, which is at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim. 9Then the border extended from the top of the mountain to the spring of the waters of Nephtoah and proceeded to the cities of Mount Ephron; then the border curved to Baalah (that is, Kiriath-jearim). 10The border went around west from Baalah to Mount Seir, and passed along to the northern slope of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon), and went down to Beth-shemesh and then continued on through Timnah. 11The border proceeded to the slope [of the hill] of Ekron northward, then curved to Shikkeron and continued to Mount Baalah and proceeded to Jabneel. Then the border ended at the [Mediterranean] sea. 12The western border was at the Great Sea, with its coastline. This is the border around the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their families.

13Now to Caleb the son of Jephunneh Joshua gave a portion among the sons of Judah, as the LORD commanded him, namely, Kiriath-arba, Arba being the father of Anak (that is, Hebron). 14So Caleb drove out from there the three sons of Anak: Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai, the children of Anak. 15Then he went up from there against the people of Debir; Debir was formerly named Kiriath-sepher. 16Caleb said, “I will give Achsah my daughter as wife to the man who attacks Kiriath-sepher and captures it.” 17And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s brother, captured it; so he gave him Achsah his daughter as a wife. 18Now it came about that when Achsah came to Othniel, she persuaded him [to allow her] to ask her father for a field. Then she [rode up to Caleb and] dismounted from her donkey, and Caleb said to her, “What do you want?” 19Achsah answered, “Give me a blessing; since you have given me the [dry] land of the Negev (South country), give me springs of water, too.” So he gave her the upper springs and the lower springs.

20This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their families (clans).

21The cities of the tribe of the sons of Judah in the extreme south toward the border of Edom were Kabzeel and Eder and Jagur, 22and Kinah and Dimonah and Adadah, 23and Kedesh and Hazor and Ithnan, 24Ziph and Telem and Bealoth, 25and Hazor-hadattah and Kerioth-hezron (that is, Hazor), 26Amam and Shema and Moladah, 27and Hazar-gaddah and Heshmon and Beth-pelet, 28and Hazar-shual and Beersheba and Biziothiah, 29Baalah and Iim and Ezem, 30and Eltolad and Chesil and Hormah, 31and Ziklag and Madmannah and Sansannah, 32and Lebaoth and Shilhim and Ain and Rimmon; in all twenty-nine cities with their villages.

33In the lowland: Eshtaol and Zorah and Ashnah, 34and Zanoah and En-gannim, Tappuah and Enam, 35Jarmuth and Adullam, Socoh and Azekah, 36and Shaaraim and Adithaim and Gederah and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages.

37Zenan and Hadashah and Migdal-gad, 38and Dilean and Mizpeh and Joktheel, 39Lachish and Bozkath and Eglon, 40and Cabbon and Lahmas and Chitlish, 41and Gederoth, Beth-dagon and Naamah and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages.

42Libnah and Ether and Ashan, 43and Iphtah and Ashnah and Nezib, 44and Keilah and Achzib and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages.

45Ekron, with its towns and villages; 46from Ekron even to the sea, all that were beside Ashdod, with their villages;

47Ashdod, with its towns and its villages; Gaza, with its towns and its villages; as far as the Brook of Egypt (Wadi el-Arish) and the Great [Mediterranean] Sea with its coastline.

48In the hill country: Shamir and Jattir and Socoh, 49and Dannah and Kiriath-sannah (that is, Debir), 50and Anab and Eshtemoh and Anim, 51and Goshen and Holon and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages.

52Arab and Dumah and Eshan, 53and Janum and Beth-tappuah and Aphekah, 54and Humtah and Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior; nine cities with their villages.

55Maon, Carmel and Ziph and Juttah, 56and Jezreel and Jokdeam and Zanoah, 57Kain, Gibeah and Timnah; ten cities with their villages.

58Halhul, Beth-zur and Gedor, 59and Maarath and Beth-anoth and Eltekon; six cities with their villages.

60Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim), and Rabbah; two cities with their villages.

61In the wilderness [that slopes downward toward the Dead Sea]: Beth-arabah, Middin and Secacah, 62and Nibshan and the City of Salt and Engedi; six cities with their villages.

63But as for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the [tribe of the] sons of Judah were not able to drive them out; so the Jebusites live with the sons of Judah in Jerusalem to this day.

Joshua 16
Territory Of Ephraim

1Then the lot (allotment) for the sons of Joseph went from the Jordan Valley at Jericho to the waters of Jericho on the east into the wilderness, going up from Jericho through the hill country to Bethel. 2Then it went from Bethel to Luz, and continued to Ataroth, the border of the Archites. 3It went down westward to the territory of the Japhletites, as far as the outskirts of lower Beth-horon, then to Gezer, and it ended at the sea.

4The sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, received their inheritance. 5Now this was the territory of the sons of Ephraim according to their families: on the east side the border of their inheritance was Ataroth-addar, as far as upper Beth-horon. 6Then the border went westward at Michmethath on the north, and turned eastward to Taanath-shiloh and continued beyond it to the east of Janoah. 7It went down from Janoah to Ataroth and to Naarah, touched Jericho and ended at the Jordan. 8The border continued from Tappuah westward to the Brook Kanah, and it ended at the [Mediterranean] sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim according to their families (clans), 9with the cities which were set apart for the sons of Ephraim within the inheritance of the sons of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages. 10But they did not drive out the Canaanites who lived in Gezer, so the Canaanites live among Ephraim to this day, and they became forced laborers.

Joshua 17
Territory Of Manasseh

1Now this was the lot (allotment) for the tribe of Manasseh, for he was the firstborn of Joseph. To Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, were allotted Gilead and Bashan, because he was a man of war. 2So the lot was also made for the rest of the sons of Manasseh according to their families—for the sons of Abiezer and for the sons of Helek and for the sons of Asriel and for the sons of Shechem and for the sons of Hepher and for the sons of Shemida; these were the male descendants of Manasseh the son of Joseph according to their families (clans).

3But Zelophehad the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, only daughters; and these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah and Tirzah. 4They came before Eleazar the priest and before Joshua the son of Nun and before the leaders and said, “The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers.” So according to the command of the LORD Joshua gave them an inheritance among their father’s brothers. 5So ten portions fell to Manasseh, besides the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is beyond the Jordan [on the east side of the river], 6because the daughters of [Zelophehad, a descendant of] Manasseh had received an inheritance among his [other] sons [whose inheritance went to their male descendants]. The land of Gilead belonged to the rest of the sons of Manasseh.

7The territory of Manasseh reached from Asher to Michmethath which was east of Shechem; then the border went southward to the inhabitants of En-tappuah. 8The land of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, but [the city of] Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to the sons of Ephraim. 9Then the border went down to the brook of Kanah, south of the brook (these cities belonged to Ephraim, among the cities of Manasseh), and Manasseh’s border was on the north side of the brook and it ended at the sea. 10The land on the south side belonged to Ephraim and that on the north side was Manasseh’s, and the sea was their border; they reached to [the territory of] Asher on the north and to [the territory of] Issachar on the east. 11Also, in Issachar and in Asher, Manasseh had Beth-shean and its towns and Ibleam and its towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of En-dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and its towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns; the third is Napheth. 12But the sons of Manasseh were not able to [drive out the inhabitants and] take possession of these cities, because the Canaanites persisted in living in that land. 13When the Israelites became strong, they put the Canaanites to forced labor, but they did not drive them out completely.

14The sons of Joseph spoke to Joshua, saying, “Why have you given us only one lot and one portion as an inheritance, when we are a numerous people whom the LORD has so far blessed?” 15Then Joshua replied, “If you are a numerous people, go up to the forest and clear ground for yourselves there in the land of the Perizzites and the Rephaim, since the hill country of Ephraim is too narrow for you.” 16The sons of Joseph said, “The hill country is not enough for us, and all the Canaanites who live in the valley have iron chariots, both those who are in Beth-shean and its towns and those in the Valley of Jezreel.” 17Joshua said to the house of Joseph, to Ephraim and to Manasseh, “You are a numerous people and have great power; you shall not have only one lot, 18but the hill country shall be yours. For though it is a forest, you shall clear it and possess it to its farthest borders; for you shall drive out the Canaanites, even though they have iron chariots and though they are strong.”

Joshua 18
Rest Of The Land Divided

1Then the whole congregation of the Israelites assembled at Shiloh [in the tribal territory of Ephraim], and set up the Tent of Meeting there; and the land was subdued before them.

2There remained among the Israelites seven tribes who had not yet divided their inheritance. 3So Joshua asked them, “How long will you put off entering to take possession of the land which the LORD, the God of your fathers, has given you? 4Provide for yourselves three men from each tribe so that I may send them, and that they may go through the land and write a description of it with regard to their [tribal] inheritance; then they shall return to me. 5They shall divide it into seven parts; [the tribe of] Judah shall remain in its territory on the south, and the house of Joseph shall remain in its territory on the north. 6You shall describe the land in seven divisions, and bring the description here to me. I will cast lots for you here before the LORD our God. 7“But the Levites have no portion among you, because the priesthood of the LORD is their inheritance. Gad and Reuben and half the tribe of Manasseh also have received their inheritance eastward beyond the Jordan, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them.”

8So the men arose and went [on their way], and Joshua commanded those who went to describe the land, saying, “Go and walk throughout the land and describe it, and return to me; and I will cast lots for you here before the LORD in Shiloh.” 9So the men set out and passed through the land, and described it by cities in seven divisions in a book; and they came back to Joshua to the camp at Shiloh. 10Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD, and there Joshua divided the land to the sons of Israel, [to each tribe] according to their portions.

The Territory of Benjamin 11Now the lot (allotment) of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin came up according to their families, and the territory of their lot fell between [the tribes of] the sons of Judah and the sons of Joseph. 12On the north side their border began at the Jordan, then it went up the slope of Jericho on the north, and up through the hill country westward, and it ended at the Beth-aven wilderness. 13Then the border continued southward toward Luz, to the slope of Luz (that is, Bethel); then the border went down to Ataroth-addar, by the hill that lies south of lower Beth-horon. 14The border changed course [from there] and turned around on the western side southward, from the hill that lies to the south opposite Beth-horon; it ended at Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim), a city of [the tribe of] the sons of Judah. This formed the western side [of Benjamin’s territory]. 15The southern side was from the edge of Kiriath-jearim, and the border went on westward and went to the source of the waters of Nephtoah. 16Then the border went down to the edge of the hill overlooking the Valley of Ben-hinnom (son of Hinnom), which is at the north end of the Valley of Rephaim; and it descended to the Valley of Hinnom, south to the slope of the Jebusite, and went on down to En-rogel. 17Then it turned toward the north and went on to En-shemesh and on to Geliloth, which is opposite the ascent of Adummim, and it went down to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. 18It continued to the north to the side opposite [Beth-] Arabah and went down to the Arabah. 19The border continued along to the north of the slope of Beth-hoglah; and the border ended at the northern bay of the Salt (Dead) Sea, at the south end of the Jordan. This was the southern border. 20And the Jordan River was its border on the east side. This was the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin, according to their families and according to its borders all around.

21Now the cities of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho and Beth-hoglah and Emek-keziz, 22and Beth-arabah and Zemaraim and Bethel, 23and Avvim and Parah and Ophrah, 24and Chephar-ammoni and Ophni and Geba; twelve cities with their villages; 25Gibeon and Ramah and Beeroth, 26and Mizpeh and Chephirah and Mozah, 27and Rekem and Irpeel and Taralah, 28and Zelah, Haeleph and the Jebusite (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah, Kiriath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of [the tribe of] the sons of Benjamin according to their families (clans).

Joshua 19
Territory Of Simeon

1Then the second lot fell to Simeon, to the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their families (clans), and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the sons of Judah. 2So they had as their inheritance Beersheba or Sheba and Moladah, 3and Hazar-shual and Balah and Ezem, 4and Eltolad and Bethul and Hormah, 5and Ziklag and Beth-marcaboth and Hazar-susah, 6and Beth-lebaoth and Sharuhen; thirteen cities with their villages; 7Ain, Rimmon and Ether and Ashan; four cities with their villages; 8and all the villages which were around these cities as far as Baalath-beer, Ramah of the Negev (South country). This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their families. 9The inheritance of the sons of Simeon was taken from the portion of the sons of Judah, for the share of the sons of Judah was too large for them; so the sons of Simeon received an inheritance within Judah’s inheritance.

Territory of Zebulun 10The third lot came up for [the tribe of] the sons of Zebulun according to their families. The territory of their inheritance extended to Sarid. 11Then its border went up westward and on to Maralah, and reached to Dabbesheth and reached to the brook east of Jokneam. 12Then it turned from Sarid east toward the sunrise as far as the border of Chisloth-tabor, and it proceeded to Daberath and on up to Japhia. 13From there it continued east toward the sunrise to Gath-hepher and to Eth-kazin, and proceeded to Rimmon which turns toward Neah. 14The border circled it on the north to Hannathon, ending at the Valley of Iphtahel. 15Included were Kattah and Nahalal and Shimron and Idalah and Bethlehem; twelve cities with their villages. 16This was the inheritance of the sons of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages.

Territory of Issachar 17The fourth lot fell to [the tribe of] Issachar, to the sons of Issachar according to their families. 18Their territory included: Jezreel and Chesulloth and Shunem, 19and Hapharaim and Shion and Anaharath, 20and Rabbith and Kishion and Ebez, 21and Remeth and En-gannim and En-haddah and Beth-pazzez. 22The border reached to Tabor and Shahazumah and Beth-shemesh, and their border ended at the Jordan; sixteen cities with their villages. 23This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages.

Territory of Asher 24The fifth lot fell to the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their families. 25Their territory was Helkath and Hali and Beten and Achshaph, 26and Allammelech and Amad and Mishal; and on the west it reached to Carmel and to Shihor-libnath. 27Then it turned eastward to Beth-dagon and reached Zebulun and the Valley of Iphtahel northward to Beth-emek and Neiel, and continued in the north to Cabul, 28and Ebron and Rehob and Hammon and Kanah, as far as Great Sidon. 29Then the border turned to Ramah, [reaching] to the fortified city of Tyre; and it turned to Hosah, and it ended at the [Mediterranean] sea at the region of Achzib. 30Included were Ummah, and Aphek and Rehob; twenty-two cities with their villages. 31This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages.

Territory of Naphtali 32The sixth lot fell to [the tribe of] the sons of Naphtali according to their families. 33Their border ran from Heleph, from the oak in Zaanannim and Adami-nekeb and Jabneel, as far as Lakkum, and it ended at the Jordan. 34Then the border turned westward to Aznoth-tabor and went from there to Hukkok; and it reached Zebulun on the south and reached Asher on the west, and to Judah toward the east at the Jordan. 35The fortified cities were Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath and Chinnereth, 36and Adamah and Ramah and Hazor, 37and Kedesh and Edrei and En-hazor, 38and Yiron and Migdal-el, Horem and Beth-anath and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages. 39This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages.

Territory of Dan 40The seventh lot fell to the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their families. 41The territory of their inheritance included Zorah and Eshtaol and Ir-shemesh, 42and Shaalabbin and Aijalon and Ithlah, 43and Elon and Timnah and Ekron, 44and Eltekeh and Gibbethon and Baalath, 45and Jehud and Bene-berak and Gath-rimmon, 46and Me-jarkon and Rakkon, with the territory opposite Joppa. 47The territory of the sons of Dan went beyond these; so the sons of Dan went up to fight against Leshem (Laish) and captured it. Then they struck it with the edge of the sword and took possession of it and settled there [between the tribes of Naphtali and Manasseh]; they renamed Leshem, Dan, after the name of their father (ancestor) Dan. 48This was the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their families (clans), these cities with their villages.

49When they had finished dividing the land for inheritance by its borders, the Israelites gave an inheritance among them to Joshua the son of Nun. 50According to the command of the LORD they gave him the city for which he asked—Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim. So he built the city and settled in it.

51These are the inheritances which Eleazar the priest, Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the households of the tribes of the sons of Israel distributed by lot in Shiloh before the LORD at the doorway of the Tent of Meeting. So they finished dividing the land.

Joshua 20
Six Cities Of Refuge

1The LORD spoke to Joshua, saying, 2“Speak to the Israelites, saying, ‘Designate the cities of refuge (asylum), of which I spoke to you through Moses, 3so that the person (manslayer) who kills any person unintentionally, without premeditation, may flee there, and they shall be your refuge from the blood avenger. 4‘He shall flee to one of these cities, and shall stand at the entrance of the gate of the city and explain his case to the elders of that city; and they shall take him into [the protection of] the city and give him a place [to stay], so that he may live among them. 5‘If the blood avenger pursues him, they shall not hand the offender (manslayer) over to him, because he killed his neighbor unintentionally and without premeditation and did not hate him beforehand. 6‘He shall live in that city until he has stood before the congregation for judgment [and if acquitted of murder he must stay there], until the death of the one who is the high priest in those days. Then the offender (manslayer) shall return to his own city and his own house from which he fled.’”

7So they set apart and consecrated Kedesh in Galilee in the hill country of Naphtali, and Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron) in the hill country of Judah. 8Beyond the Jordan east of Jericho, they designated Bezer in the wilderness on the plain from the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead from the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan from the tribe of Manasseh. 9These were the appointed cities for all the Israelites and for the stranger sojourning (living temporarily) among them, so that whoever killed any person unintentionally may flee there, and not die by the hand of the blood avenger until he had stood before the congregation [for judgment].

Joshua 21
Forty-Eight Cities Of The Levites

1Then the heads of the households of the Levites came to Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the households of the tribes of the sons of Israel. 2They spoke to them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, “The LORD commanded Moses to give us cities to live in, with their pasture lands for our cattle.” 3So the sons of Israel gave the Levites from their inheritance these [forty-eight] cities and their pasture lands, in accordance with the command of the LORD. 4The [first] lot (allotment) came out for the families of the Kohathites. So those Levites who were sons (descendants) of Aaron the priest received thirteen cities by lot from the tribe of Judah and from the tribe of Simeon and from the tribe of Benjamin.

5The rest of the sons of Kohath received ten cities by lot from the families of the tribe of Ephraim and from the tribe of Dan and from the half-tribe of Manasseh.

6The sons of Gershon received thirteen cities by lot from the families of the tribe of Issachar and from the tribe of Asher and from the tribe of Naphtali and from the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan.

7The sons of Merari according to their families received twelve cities from the tribe of Reuben and from the tribe of Gad and from the tribe of Zebulun.

8The sons of Israel gave by lot to the Levites these cities with their pasture lands, as the LORD had commanded through Moses.

9They gave these cities which are mentioned here by name from the tribe of the sons of Judah and from the tribe of the sons of Simeon; 10and they were for the sons of Aaron, one of the families of the Kohathites, of the sons of Levi, because the lot fell to them first. 11They gave them [the city of] Kiriath-arba, Arba being the father of Anak (that is, Hebron) in the hill country of Judah, with its surrounding pasture lands. 12But the fields of the city and its villages they had given to Caleb the son of Jephunneh as his property.

13So to the sons of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron, the city of refuge for anyone who committed manslaughter, with its pasture lands, and Libnah with its pasture lands, 14and Jattir with its pasture lands and Eshtemoa with its pasture lands, 15and Holon with its pasture lands and Debir with its pasture lands, 16and Ain with its pasture lands and Juttah with its pasture lands and Beth-shemesh with its pasture lands; nine cities from these two tribes (Judah and Simeon). 17From the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with its pasture lands, and Geba with its pasture lands, 18Anathoth with its pasture lands and Almon with its pasture lands; four cities. 19All the cities of the sons of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their pasture lands.

20Then the cities from the tribe of Ephraim were allotted to the families of the sons of Kohath, the Levites, even to the rest of the sons of Kohath. 21They gave them Shechem, the city of refuge for anyone who committed manslaughter, with its pasture lands, in the hill country of Ephraim, and Gezer with its pasture lands, 22and Kibzaim with its pasture lands and Beth-horon with its pasture lands; four cities. 23From the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with its pasture lands, Gibbethon with its pasture lands, 24Aijalon with its pasture lands, Gath-rimmon with its pasture lands; four cities. 25From the half-tribe of Manasseh, they allotted Taanach with its pasture lands and Gath-rimmon with its pasture lands; two cities. 26All the cities with their pasture lands for the families of the rest of the sons of Kohath totaled ten.

27To the sons of Gershon, one of the families of the Levites, they gave from the other half-tribe of Manasseh, [the city of] Golan in Bashan, the city of refuge for anyone who committed manslaughter, with its pasture lands, and Be-eshterah with its pasture lands; two cities. 28From the tribe of Issachar, they gave Kishion with its pasture lands, Daberath with its pasture lands, 29Jarmuth with its pasture lands, and En-gannim with its pasture lands; four cities. 30From the tribe of Asher, they gave Mishal with its pasture lands, Abdon with its pasture lands, 31Helkath with its pasture lands and Rehob with its pasture lands; four cities. 32From the tribe of Naphtali, they gave Kedesh in Galilee, the city of refuge for anyone who committed manslaughter, with its pasture lands and Hammoth-dor with its pasture lands and Kartan with its pasture lands; three cities. 33All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their pasture lands.

34To the families of the sons of Merari, the rest of the Levites, they gave from the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with its pasture lands and Kartah with its pasture lands, 35Dimnah with its pasture lands and Nahalal with its pasture lands; four cities. 36From the tribe of Reuben, they gave Bezer with its pasture lands and Jahaz with its pasture lands, 37Kedemoth with its pasture lands and Mephaath with its pasture lands; four cities. 38From the tribe of Gad, they gave Ramoth in Gilead, the city of refuge for anyone who committed manslaughter, with its pasture lands and Mahanaim with its pasture lands, 39Heshbon with its pasture lands and Jazer with its pasture lands; four cities in all. 40All [these were] the cities of the sons of Merari according to their families, the rest of the families of the Levites; and their lot was twelve cities.

41All the cities of the Levites in the midst of the property of the sons of Israel were forty-eight cities with their pasture lands. 42These cities each had its surrounding pasture lands; so it was with all these cities.

43So the LORD gave Israel all the land which He had sworn to give to their fathers (ancestors), and they took possession of it and lived in it. 44The LORD gave them rest [from conflict] on every side, in accordance with everything that He had sworn to their fathers, and not one of all their enemies stood before them [in battle]; the LORD handed over all their enemies to them. 45Not one of the good promises which the LORD had spoken to the house of Israel failed; all had come to pass.

Joshua 22
Tribes Beyond Jordan Return

1Then Joshua called the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, 2and said to them, “You have kept all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have listened to and obeyed my voice in everything that I commanded you. 3You have not deserted your brothers these many days to this day, but have [carefully] kept the obligation of the commandment of the LORD your God. 4And now the LORD your God has given rest to your brothers, as He has promised them; so turn now and go to your tents, to the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you beyond the [east side of the] Jordan. 5“Only be very careful and diligently observe the commandment and the law which Moses the servant of the LORD has commanded you to love the LORD your God and walk in all His ways and keep His commandments and hold fast to Him and serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul [your very life].” 6So Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they went to their tents.

7Now to the one-half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given a possession in Bashan, but to the other half Joshua gave a possession on the west side of the Jordan among their brothers. So when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he blessed them, 8and he said to them, “Return to your tents with great riches and with very much livestock, with silver, gold, bronze, iron, and with very many clothes; divide the spoil of your enemies with your brothers (fellow tribesmen).” 9So the sons (descendants) of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned home and departed from the [other] sons (western tribes) of Israel at Shiloh which is in the land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, to the land of their own which they had possessed, in accordance with the command of the LORD through Moses.

The Offensive Altar 10When they came to the region of the Jordan which is in the land of Canaan, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh built an altar there by the Jordan, an altar that was great to behold. 11And the [other] sons of Israel heard it said, “Look, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar at the edge of the land of Canaan, in the region [west] of the Jordan, on the side belonging to the sons of Israel.” 12When the sons of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the Israelites gathered at Shiloh to make war against them.

13Then the sons of Israel sent Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land of Gilead, 14and with him ten leaders, one leader from each father’s household from each of the tribes of Israel; and each one was the head of his father’s household among the thousands of Israel. 15They came to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in the land of Gilead, and they said to them, 16“This is what the entire congregation of the LORD says, ‘What is this disloyal and unfaithful act which you have committed against the God of Israel, so as to turn away from following the LORD this day, by building yourselves an altar, to rebel against the LORD this day? 17‘Is the wrongdoing (idolatry) of Peor not enough for us, from which we have not cleansed ourselves to this day, even though the affliction [in which twenty-four thousand died] came on the congregation of the LORD, 18that you would turn away this day from following the LORD? If you rebel against the LORD today, He will be angry with the entire congregation of Israel tomorrow. 19‘If, however, the land of your possession is unclean, then cross into the land of the possession of the LORD, where the LORD’S tabernacle is situated, and settle down among us. But do not rebel against the LORD, or rebel against us by building an altar for yourselves, besides the altar of the LORD our God [at Shiloh]. 20‘Did not Achan the son of Zerah act unfaithfully in the things under the ban, and [as a result God’s] wrath came on the entire congregation of Israel? And that man did not perish alone in his wrongdoing.’”

21Then the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered and said to the heads of the families of Israel, 22“The Mighty One, God, the LORD, the Mighty One, God, the LORD! He knows, and may Israel itself know. If it was in rebellion, or if in an unfaithful act against the LORD, do not save us this day! 23If we have built an altar for ourselves to turn away from following the LORD, or if [we did so] to offer a burnt offering or grain offering on it, or if to offer sacrifices of peace offerings on it, may the LORD Himself require it [of us and hold us responsible]. 24But in truth we have done this out of concern, for a reason, saying, ‘In time to come your sons (descendants) may say to our sons, What claim do you have to the LORD, the God of Israel? 25“For the LORD has made the Jordan a border between us and you, you sons of Reuben and sons of Gad; you have no part in the LORD.” So your sons (descendants) may cause our sons to stop fearing the LORD.’

26“So we said, ‘Let us prepare and build an altar, not for burnt offering or for sacrifice, 27but to be a witness between us and you and between the generations after us, that we are to perform the service of the LORD before Him with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices and with our peace offerings, so that your sons (descendants) will not say to our sons in time to come, “You have no part in the LORD.”’ 28“So we said, ‘If your descendants should say this to us or to our descendants in time to come, then we can reply, “See the copy of the altar of the LORD which our fathers made, not for burnt offering or for sacrifice, but rather it is a witness between us and you.”’ 29“Far be it from us that we should rebel against the LORD and turn away from following the LORD this day, by building an altar for burnt offering, for grain offering or for sacrifice, besides the altar of the LORD our God which is before His tabernacle [in Shiloh].”

30So when Phinehas the priest and the leaders of the congregation and heads of the families of Israel who were with him, heard the words which the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the sons of Manasseh spoke, it pleased them. 31Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said to the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the sons of Manasseh, “Today we know that the LORD is among us, because you have not committed this unfaithful act against the LORD; indeed you have saved Israel from the hand of the LORD.”

32Then Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest and the leaders returned from the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad, from the land of Gilead to the land of Canaan, to the sons of Israel, and brought back word to them. 33The report pleased the sons of Israel, and the sons of Israel blessed God; and they said no more about going to battle against them to destroy the land in which the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad were living. 34The sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad called the altar Witness; “For it is a witness between us that the LORD is God.”

Joshua 23
Joshua’s Farewell Address

1A long time after that, when the LORD had given Israel rest from all their enemies on every side, and Joshua had grown old and advanced in years, 2that Joshua called all Israel, their elders and their heads and their judges and their officers, and said to them, “I am old and advanced in years. 3And you have seen all that the LORD your God has done to all these nations for your sake; for the LORD your God is He who has been fighting for you. 4See, I have allotted to you these nations that remain as an inheritance for your tribes, with all the nations which I have cut off, from the Jordan [on the east] to the Great [Mediterranean] Sea toward the setting sun. 5The LORD your God will push them away from before you and drive them out of your sight and you will take possession of their land, just as the LORD your God promised you. 6Be steadfast and very determined to keep and to do everything that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, so that you do not turn aside from it to the right or the left, 7so that you do not associate with these nations which remain among you, or mention the name of their gods, or make anyone swear [an oath by them], or serve them, or bow down to them. 8But you are to cling to the LORD your God, just as you have done to this day. 9For the LORD has driven out great and mighty nations from before you; and as for you, no man has been able to stand [in opposition] before you to this day. 10One of your men puts to flight a thousand, for the LORD your God is He who is fighting for you, just as He promised you. 11So be very careful and watchful of yourselves to love the LORD your God. 12For if you ever turn back and cling to the rest of these nations, these that are left among you, and intermarry with them, so that you associate with them and they with you, 13know and understand with certainty that the LORD your God will not continue to drive these nations out from before you; but they will be a snare and trap to you, and a whip on your sides and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from this good land which the LORD your God has given you.

14“Now behold, today I am going the way of all the earth, and you know in all your hearts and in all your souls that not one word of all the good words which the LORD your God has promised concerning you has failed; all have been fulfilled for you, not one of them has failed. 15It shall come about that just as every good word which the LORD your God spoke and promised to you has been fulfilled for you, so the LORD will bring upon you every bad thing [about which He warned you], until He has destroyed and eliminated you from this good land which the LORD your God has given you. 16“When you transgress (violate) the covenant of the LORD your God, which He commanded you [to follow], and you go and serve other gods and bow down to them, then the anger of the LORD will be kindled against you, and you shall perish quickly from the good land which He has given you.”

Joshua 24
Joshua Reviews Israel’s History

1Then Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel and for their heads and for their judges and for their officers; they presented themselves before God. 2Joshua said to all the people, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says, ‘Your fathers, including Terah, the father of Abraham and the father of Nahor, lived beyond the [Euphrates] River in ancient times; and they served other gods. 3‘Then I took your father Abraham from beyond the [Euphrates] River and led him through all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his descendants, and I gave him Isaac. 4‘To Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau, and to Esau I gave [the hill country of] Mount Seir to possess; but Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt. 5‘Then I sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt by what I did in its midst; and afterward I brought you out. 6‘Then I brought your fathers out of Egypt, and you came to the sea; and the Egyptians pursued your fathers with chariots and horsemen to the Red Sea. 7‘When they cried out to the LORD [for help], He put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them and covered them; and your own eyes saw what I did in Egypt. And you lived in the wilderness a long time (forty years). 8‘Then I brought you into the land of the Amorites who lived on the other side of the Jordan, and they fought with you; and I gave them into your hand, and you took possession of their land and I destroyed them before you. 9‘Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and fought against Israel, and he sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you. 10‘But I would not listen to Balaam. Therefore he had to bless you, so I saved you from Balak’s hand. 11‘You crossed the Jordan and came to Jericho; and the citizens of Jericho fought against you, as did the Amorite and the Perizzite and the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Girgashite, the Hivite and the Jebusite; and so I gave them into your hand. 12‘I sent the hornet [that is, the terror of you] before you, which drove the two kings of the Amorites out before you; but it was not by your sword or by your bow. 13‘I gave you a land for which you did not labor, and cities which you did not build, and you live in them; you eat from vineyards and olive groves which you did not plant.’

14“Now, therefore, fear the LORD and serve Him in sincerity and in truth; remove the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the [Euphrates] River and in Egypt, and serve the LORD. 15“If it is unacceptable in your sight to serve the LORD, choose for yourselves this day whom you will serve: whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the River, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you live; but as for me and my house, we will serve the LORD.”

16The people answered, “Far be it from us to abandon (reject) the LORD to serve other gods; 17for the LORD our God is He who brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and who did these great signs (miracles) in our sight and kept us safe all along the way that we went and among all the peoples among whom we passed. 18“The LORD drove all the peoples out from before us, even the Amorites who lived in the land. We also will serve the LORD, for He is our God.”

19Then Joshua said to the people, “You will not be able to serve the LORD [if you serve any other gods], for He is a holy God; He is a jealous God [demanding what is rightfully and uniquely His]. He will not forgive your transgression [of His law] or your sins. 20“If you do abandon (reject) the LORD and serve foreign gods, then He will turn and do you harm and consume and destroy you after He has done you good.” 21The people said to Joshua, “No, but we will serve [only] the LORD.” 22Joshua then said to the people, “You are witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen for yourselves the LORD, to serve Him.” And they said, “We are witnesses.” 23“Now then, remove the foreign gods which are among you, and incline your hearts toward the LORD, the God of Israel.” 24The people said to Joshua, “We will serve the LORD our God and we will listen to and obey His voice.” 25So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and made for them a statute and an ordinance at Shechem. 26And Joshua wrote these words in the Book of the Law of God. Then he took a large stone and set it up there under the oak that was in [the courtyard of] the sanctuary of the LORD. 27Joshua then said to all the people, “Look, this stone shall serve as a witness against us, for it has heard all the words of the LORD which He spoke to us; so it shall be a witness against you, so that [afterward] you do not deny your God.” 28Then Joshua sent the people away, each to [the territory of] his inheritance.

Joshua’s Death and Burial 29It happened after these things that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, at the age of a hundred and ten years. 30They buried him in the territory of his inheritance in Timnath-serah, which is in the hill country of Ephraim, on the north side of Mount Gaash.

31Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua, and had known all the works of the LORD which He had done for Israel.

32Now they buried the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up from Egypt, at Shechem, in the plot of land which Jacob had bought from the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for a hundred pieces of money; and it became the inheritance of the sons of Joseph. 33And Eleazar [the priest], the son of Aaron died; and they buried him at Gibeah [on the hill] of Phinehas his son, which had been given to him in the hill country of Ephraim.

Judges
Jerusalem Is Captured

1Now it came about after the death of Joshua, that the sons (descendants) of Israel (Jacob) asked the LORD, “Who shall go up first for us against the Canaanites, to fight against them?” 2And the LORD said, “Judah shall go up [first]; behold, I have given the land into his hand.” 3And [the tribe of the sons of] Judah said to [the tribe of the sons of] Simeon his brother, “Come up with me into my allotted territory, so that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with you into your allotted territory.” So Simeon went with him. 4Then Judah went up, and the LORD gave the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand, and they struck down in defeat ten thousand men at Bezek. 5Then they found Adoni-bezek in Bezek and fought against him, and they struck down in defeat the Canaanites and the Perizzites. 6But Adoni-bezek fled; and they pursued him and caught him and cut off his thumbs and his big toes. 7Adoni-bezek said, “Seventy kings with their thumbs and big toes cut off used to gather up scraps of food under my table; as I have done [to others], so God has repaid me.” So they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there.

8Then the sons of Judah fought against [Jebusite] Jerusalem and captured it and struck it with the edge of the sword and set the city on fire. 9Afterward the sons of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites who lived in the hill country, in the Negev (South country) and in the lowland. 10So Judah went against the Canaanites who lived in Hebron (the name of Hebron formerly was Kiriath-arba); and they defeated Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai.

Capture of Other Cities 11From there [the tribe of] Judah went against the inhabitants of Debir (the name of Debir formerly was Kiriath-sepher [city of books and scribes]). 12And Caleb said, “Whoever attacks Kiriath-sepher and captures it, I will even give him my daughter Achsah as a wife.” 13Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, captured it; so he gave him his daughter Achsah as a wife. 14When she came to Othniel, she persuaded him to [allow her to] ask her father [Caleb] for a field. Then she [rode up to Caleb and] dismounted from her donkey, and Caleb said to her, “What do you want?” 15She said to him, “Give me a blessing; since you have given me the land of the Negev (South country), give me springs of water, too.” So Caleb gave her the upper springs and the lower springs.

16The sons of [Jethro] the Kenite, Moses’ father-in-law, went up from the City of Palms (Jericho) with the sons of Judah, to the wilderness of Judah which is in the Negev (South country) near Arad; and they went and lived with the people. 17Then [the warriors of the tribe of] Judah went with [the warriors of the tribe of] Simeon his brother, and they struck the Canaanites living in Zephath and utterly destroyed it. So the city was called Hormah (destruction). 18Also [the warriors of] Judah captured Gaza with its territory and Ashkelon with its territory and Ekron with its territory. 19The LORD was with Judah, and [the tribe of] Judah took possession of the hill country, but they could not dispossess and drive out those inhabiting the valley because they had iron chariots. 20Then they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses had said, and he drove out from there the three sons of Anak. 21But the sons of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites who inhabited Jerusalem; so the Jebusites have lived with the sons of Benjamin in Jerusalem to this day.

22The house of Joseph also went up against Bethel, and the LORD was with them. 23The house of Joseph spied out Bethel (now the name of the city was formerly Luz). 24The spies saw a man coming out of the city and they said to him, “Please show us the entrance to the city and we will treat you kindly.” 25So he showed them the entrance to the city, and they struck the city with the edge of the sword, but they let the man and all his family go free. 26The man went into the land of the Hittites and built a city and named it Luz, which is its name to this day.

Places Not Conquered 27But [the tribe of] Manasseh did not take possession of Beth-shean and its villages, or Taanach and its villages, or the inhabitants of Dor and its villages, or the inhabitants of Ibleam and its villages, or the inhabitants of Megiddo and its villages; so the Canaanites remained in that land. 28It happened when Israel became strong, that they put the Canaanites to forced labor, but they did not drive them out completely.

29Neither did [the warriors of] Ephraim drive out the Canaanites who were living in Gezer; so the Canaanites lived in Gezer among them.

30[The warriors of the tribe of] Zebulun did not drive out the inhabitants of Kitron or of Nahalol; so the Canaanites lived among them and were put to forced labor.

31[The warriors of the tribe of] Asher did not drive out the inhabitants of Acco, or the inhabitants of Sidon, or of Ahlab, or of Achzib, or of Helbah, or of Aphik, or of Rehob. 32So the Asherites lived among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land, because they did not drive them out.

33Neither did [the warriors of] Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, or the inhabitants of Beth-anath, but they lived among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land; and the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath became forced labor for them.

34Then the Amorites forced the sons of Dan [back] into the hill country, for they would not allow them to come down into the valley; 35yet the Amorites persisted in living on Mount Heres (the mountain of the sun), in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim; but when the power of the house (descendants) of Joseph became strong and prevailed, they became forced labor. 36The border of the Amorites ran from the ascent of Akrabbim, from Sela (rock) and upward.

Judges 2
Israel Rebuked

1Now the Angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim. And he said, “I brought you up from Egypt and led you to the land which I swore [to give] to your fathers; and I said, ‘I will never break My covenant with you, 2and as for you, you shall not make a covenant with the inhabitants of this land; you shall tear down their altars.’ But you have not obeyed Me; what is this that you have done? 3“So I also said, ‘I will not drive your enemies out before you; but they will be like thorns in your sides and their gods will be a snare to you.’” 4When the Angel of the LORD had spoken these words to all the Israelites, the people raised their voices and wept. 5So they named that place Bochim (weepers); and there they offered sacrifices to the LORD.

Joshua Dies 6And when Joshua had sent the people away, the [tribes of the] Israelites went each to his inheritance, to take possession of the land. 7The people served the LORD all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great work of the LORD which He had done for Israel. 8Then Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died at the age of a hundred and ten. 9And they buried him in the territory of his inheritance in Timnath-heres, in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash. 10Also, all [the people of] that generation were gathered to their fathers [in death]; and another generation arose after them who did not know (recognize, understand) the LORD, nor even the work which He had done for Israel.

Israel Serves Baals 11Then the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD and worshiped and served the Baals, 12and they abandoned the LORD, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt. They followed other gods from the gods of the peoples who were around them, and they bowed down to them, and offended and provoked the LORD to anger. 13So they abandoned the LORD and served Baal [the pagan god of the Canaanites] and the Ashtaroth. 14So the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He gave them into the hands (power) of plunderers who robbed them; and He sold them into the hands of their surrounding enemies, so that they could no longer stand [in opposition] before their enemies. 15Wherever they went, the hand of the LORD was against them for evil (misfortune), as the LORD had spoken, and as the LORD had sworn to them, so that they were severely distressed.

16Then the LORD raised up judges who rescued them from the hands of those who robbed them. 17Yet they did not listen to their judges, for they played the prostitute after other gods and they bowed down to them. They quickly turned aside from the way in which their fathers had walked in obeying the commandments of the LORD; they did not do as their fathers. 18When the LORD raised up judges for them, He was with the judge and He rescued them from the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for the LORD was moved to pity by their groaning because of those who oppressed and afflicted them. 19But when the judge died, they turned back and behaved more corruptly than their fathers, in following and serving other gods, and bowing down to them. They did not abandon their practices or their stubborn ways. 20So the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He said, “Because this nation has transgressed (violated) My covenant (binding agreement) which I commanded their fathers, and has not listened to My voice, 21I also will no longer drive out before them any of the nations which Joshua left [to be conquered] when he died, 22in order to test [the loyalty of] Israel by them, whether Israel will keep the way of the LORD to walk in it, as their fathers did, or not.” 23So the LORD allowed those nations to remain, not driving them out at once; and He did not give them into the hand of Joshua.

Judges 3
Idolatry Leads To Servitude

1Now these are the nations which the LORD left [in order] to test Israel by them (that is, all [the people of Israel] who had not [previously] experienced any of the wars in Canaan; 2only in order that the generations of the sons of Israel might be taught war, at least those who had not experienced it previously). 3The remaining nations are: the five lords (governors) of the Philistines, all the Canaanites, the Sidonians, and the Hivites who lived on Mount Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon to the entrance of Hamath. 4They were [allowed to remain] for the testing of Israel, to determine whether Israel would listen to and obey the commandments of the LORD, which He had commanded their fathers (ancestors) through Moses. 5And the Israelites lived among the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites; 6and they took their daughters for themselves as wives and gave their own daughters to their sons, and served their [pagan] gods.

7And the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD, and they forgot the LORD their God and served the Baals and the Asheroth. 8So the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He sold them into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia; and the Israelites served Cushan-rishathaim eight years. The First Judge Rescues Israel 9But when the Israelites cried out to the LORD [for help], the LORD raised up a man to rescue the people of Israel, Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother. 10The Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel. He went out to war, and the LORD gave Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand, and he prevailed over Cushan-rishathaim. 11And the land was at rest [from oppression for] forty years. Then Othniel the son of Kenaz died.

12Now the Israelites again did evil in the sight of the LORD, and the LORD strengthened Eglon king of Moab against Israel, since they had done what was evil in the sight of the LORD. 13And Eglon gathered to him the sons of Ammon and Amalek, and went and struck down Israel [in defeat], and they took possession of the City of Palm Trees (Jericho). 14And the Israelites served Eglon king of Moab eighteen years.

Ehud Rescues Israel from Moab 15But when the Israelites cried out to the LORD [for help], the LORD raised up a man to rescue them, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a left-handed man. And the Israelites sent a gift of tribute by him to Eglon king of Moab. 16Now Ehud made for himself a sword a cubit long, which had two edges, and he bound it on his right thigh under his robe. 17And he brought the tribute to Eglon king of Moab. Now Eglon was a very fat man. 18And when Ehud had finished presenting the tribute, he sent away the people who had carried it. 19But Ehud himself turned back from the sculptured stones at Gilgal, [and he returned to Eglon] and said [to him], “I have a secret message for you, O king.” Eglon said “Keep silence.” And all who attended him left him. 20Ehud came to him as he was sitting alone in his [private] cool upper chamber, and Ehud said, “I have a message from God for you.” And the king got up from his seat. 21Then Ehud reached out with his left hand and took the sword from his right thigh, and plunged it into Eglon’s belly. 22And the hilt also went in after the blade, and the fat closed over the blade, because Ehud did not draw the sword out of his belly; and the refuse came out. 23Then Ehud went out into the vestibule and shut the doors of the upper chamber behind him, and locked them.

24When Ehud departed, Eglon’s servants came. And when they saw that the doors of the upper room were locked, they said, “He is only relieving himself in the cool room.” 25They waited [a very long time] until they became embarrassed and uneasy, but he still did not open the doors of the upper room. So [finally] they took the key and opened them, and behold, their master had fallen to the floor, dead.

26Now Ehud escaped while they lingered, and he passed beyond the sculptured stones and escaped to Seirah. 27When he had arrived, he blew a trumpet in the hill country of Ephraim; and the sons of Israel went down with him from the hill country, and he was in front of them. 28And he said to them, “Pursue them, for the LORD has handed over your enemies the Moabites to you.” So they went down after him and seized the fords of the Jordan opposite Moab and did not allow anyone to cross. 29They struck down at that time about ten thousand Moabite men, all strong, courageous men; not a man escaped. 30So Moab was subdued and humbled that day under the hand of Israel, and the land was at rest for eighty years.

Shamgar Rescues from Philistines 31After Ehud came Shamgar the son of Anath, who struck down six hundred Philistine men with an oxgoad. He too saved Israel.

Judges 4
Deborah And Barak Rescue From Canaanites

1But the Israelites again did evil in the sight of the LORD, after Ehud died. 2So the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, who reigned in Hazor. The commander of his army was Sisera, who lived in Harosheth-hagoyim. 3Then the Israelites cried out to the LORD [for help], for Jabin had nine hundred iron chariots and had oppressed and tormented the sons of Israel severely for twenty years.

4Now Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, was judging Israel at that time. 5She used to sit [to hear and decide disputes] under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in the hill country of Ephraim; and the Israelites came up to her for judgment. 6Now she sent word and summoned Barak the son of Abinoam from Kedesh-naphtali, and said to him, “Behold, the LORD, the God of Israel, has commanded, ‘Go and march to Mount Tabor, and take with you ten thousand men [of war] from the tribes of Naphtali and Zebulun. 7‘I will draw out Sisera, the commander of Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his infantry to meet you at the river Kishon, and I will hand him over to you.’” 8Then Barak said to her, “If you will go with me, then I will go; but if you will not go with me, I will not go.” 9She said, “I will certainly go with you; nevertheless, the journey that you are about to take will not be for your honor and glory, because the LORD will sell Sisera into the hand of a woman.” Then Deborah got up and went with Barak to Kedesh. 10And Barak summoned [the fighting men of the tribes of] Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh, and ten thousand men went up under his command; Deborah also went up with him.

11Now Heber the Kenite had separated himself from the Kenites, from the sons of Hobab the father-in-law of Moses, and had pitched his tent as far away as the terebinth tree in Zaanannim, which is near Kedesh.

12When someone told Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam had gone up to Mount Tabor, 13Sisera called together all his chariots, nine hundred iron chariots, and all the people who were with him, from Harosheth-hagoyim to the river Kishon. 14Deborah said to Barak, “Arise! For this is the day when the LORD has given Sisera into your hand. Has the LORD not gone out before you?” So Barak went down from Mount Tabor with ten thousand men following him. 15And the LORD routed Sisera and all his chariots and [confused] all his army with the edge of the sword before Barak; and Sisera dismounted from his chariot and fled away on foot. 16But Barak pursued the chariots and the army to Harosheth-hagoyim, and the entire army of Sisera fell by the sword; not even one man was left.

17But Sisera fled on foot to the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, because there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite. 18Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said to him, “Turn aside, my lord, turn aside to me! Have no fear.” So he turned aside to her [and went] into the tent, and she covered him with a rug. 19And he said to her, “Please give me a little water to drink because I am thirsty.” And she opened a skin of milk and gave him a drink; then she covered him. 20And he said to her, “Stand at the door of the tent, and if any man comes and asks you, ‘Is there anyone here?’ tell him, ‘No.’” 21But Jael, Heber’s wife, took a tent peg and a hammer in her hand, and came up quietly to him and drove the peg through his temple, and it went through into the ground; for he was sound asleep and exhausted. So he died. 22And behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him and said to him, “Come, and I will show you the man whom you are seeking.” And he entered [her tent] with her, and behold Sisera lay dead with the tent peg in his temple.

23So on that day God subdued and humbled Jabin king of Canaan before the sons of Israel. 24And the hand of the sons of Israel pressed down heavier and heavier on Jabin king of Canaan, until they had destroyed him.

Judges 5
The Song Of Deborah And Barak

1Then Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam sang on that day, saying,
2“For the leaders who took the lead in Israel,
For the people who volunteered [for battle],
Bless the LORD!
3“Hear, O kings; listen, O rulers!
I will sing to the LORD,
I will sing praise to the LORD, the God of Israel.
4“LORD, when You went out from Seir,
When You marched from the field of Edom,
The earth quaked, the heavens also dripped,
Yes, the clouds dripped water.
5“The mountains quaked at the presence of the LORD,
Yes, this Sinai, at the presence of the LORD, the God of Israel.
6“In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath,
In the days of Jael, the highways were deserted,
And travelers went by roundabout ways.
7“The villagers ceased to be; they ceased in Israel
Until I, Deborah, arose,
Until I arose, a mother in Israel.
8“They chose new gods;
Then war was in the gates.
Was there a shield or spear seen
Among forty thousand in Israel?
9“My heart goes out to the commanders of Israel,
The volunteers among the people;
Bless the LORD!
10“Sing of it, you who ride on white donkeys,
You who sit on rich carpets,
And you who walk by the way.
11“At the sound of those who divide flocks among the watering places,
There they shall recount the righteous acts of the LORD,
The righteous acts toward His villagers in Israel.
Then the people of the LORD went down to the gates.
12“Awake, awake, Deborah;
Awake, awake, sing a song!
Arise, Barak, and lead away your captives, you son of Abinoam.
13“Then down marched the survivors to the nobles;
The people of the LORD marched down for Me against the mighty.
14“From Ephraim those whose root is in Amalek came down,
After you, Benjamin, with your relatives;
From Machir came down commanders and rulers,
And from Zebulun those who handle the scepter of the scribe.
15“And the heads of Issachar came with Deborah;
As Issachar, so was Barak;
Into the valley they rushed at his heels;
Among the divisions of Reuben
There were great searchings of heart.
16“Why [Reuben] did you linger among the sheepfolds,
To hear the piping for the flocks?
Among the divisions of Reuben
There were great searchings of heart.
17“Gilead remained beyond the Jordan;
And why did Dan live as an alien on ships?
Asher sat [still] on the seacoast,
And remained by its landings.
[These did not come to battle for God’s people.]
18“But Zebulun was a people who risked their lives to the [point of] death;
Naphtali also, on the heights of the field.
19“The kings came and fought;
Then the kings of Canaan fought
At Taanach by the waters of Megiddo.
Spoils of silver they did not obtain.
20“From the heavens the stars fought,
From their courses they fought against Sisera.
21“The torrent Kishon swept the enemy away,
The ancient torrent, the torrent Kishon.
O my soul, march on with strength.
22“Then the horses’ hoofs beat [loudly]
Because of the galloping—the galloping of his valiant and powerful steeds.
23‘Curse Meroz,’ said the messenger of the LORD,
‘Utterly curse its inhabitants;
Because they did not come to the help of the LORD,
To the help of the LORD against the mighty.’
24“Most blessed of women is Jael,
The wife of Heber the Kenite;
Most blessed is she of women in the tent.
25“Sisera asked for water and she gave him milk;
She brought him curds in a magnificent bowl.
26“She reached out her [left] hand for the tent peg,
And her right hand for the workmen’s hammer.
Then she struck Sisera, she smashed his head;
And she shattered and pierced his temple.
27“He bowed, he fell, he lay [still] at her feet;
At her feet he bowed, he fell;
Where he bowed, there he fell dead.
28“Out of the window she looked down and lamented (cried out in a shrill voice),
The mother of Sisera through the lattice,
‘Why is his chariot delayed in coming?
Why have the hoofbeats of his chariots delayed?’
29“Her wise ladies answered her,
Indeed, she repeated her words to herself,
30‘Are they not finding and dividing the spoil?
A maiden (concubine) or two for every man;
A spoil of dyed garments for Sisera,
A spoil of dyed garments embroidered,
Two pieces of dyed garments embroidered for the neck of the plunderer?’
31“So let all Your enemies perish, O LORD;
But let those who love Him be like the rising of the sun in its might.”
And the land was at rest for forty years.

Judges 6
Israel Oppressed By Midian

1Then the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD gave them into the hand of Midian for seven years. 2The [powerful] hand of Midian prevailed against Israel. Because of Midian the sons of Israel made for themselves the dens (hideouts) which were in the mountains, and the caves and the [mountain] strongholds. 3For it was whenever Israel had sown [their seed] that the Midianites would come up with the Amalekites and the people of the east and go up against them. 4So they would camp against them and destroy the crops of the land as far as Gaza, and leave no sustenance in Israel as well as no sheep, ox, or donkey. 5For they would come up with their livestock and their tents, and they would come in as numerous as locusts; both they and their camels were innumerable. So they came into the land to devastate it. 6So Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites, and the Israelites cried out to the LORD [for help].

7Now it came about when they cried out to the LORD because of Midian, 8that the LORD sent a prophet to the Israelites, and he said to them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, ‘I brought you up from Egypt and brought you out of the house of slavery. 9‘And I rescued you from the hand of the Egyptians and from the hand of all who oppressed you, and drove them out before you and gave you their land, 10and I said to you, “I am the LORD your God; you shall not fear the gods of the Amorites in whose land you live.” But you have not listened to and obeyed My voice.’”

Gideon Is Visited 11Now the Angel of the LORD came and sat under the terebinth tree at Ophrah, which belonged to Joash the Abiezrite, and his son Gideon was beating wheat in the wine press [instead of the threshing floor] to [hide it and] save it from the Midianites. 12And the Angel of the LORD appeared to him and said to him, “The LORD is with you, O brave man.” 13But Gideon said to him, “Please my lord, if the LORD is with us, then why has all this happened to us? And where are all His wondrous works which our fathers told us about when they said, ‘Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt?’ But now the LORD has abandoned us and put us into the hand of Midian.” 14The LORD turned to him and said, “Go in this strength of yours and save Israel from the hand of Midian. Have I not sent you?” 15But Gideon said to Him, “Please Lord, how am I to rescue Israel? Behold, my family is the least [significant] in Manasseh, and I am the youngest (smallest) in my father’s house.” 16The LORD answered him, “I will certainly be with you, and you will strike down the Midianites as [if they were only] one man.” 17Gideon replied to Him, “If I have found any favor in Your sight, then show me a sign that it is You who speaks with me. 18“Please do not depart from here until I come back to You, and bring my offering and place it before You.” And He said, “I will wait until you return.”

19Then Gideon went and prepared a young goat and unleavened bread from an ephah of flour. The meat he put in a basket and the broth in a pot, and he brought the food to Him under the oak (terebinth) and presented it. 20The Angel of God said to him, “Take the meat and unleavened bread and lay them on this rock, and pour out the broth [over them].” And he did so. 21Then the Angel of the LORD put out the end of the staff that was in His hand and touched the meat and the unleavened bread; and fire flared up from the rock and consumed the meat and the unleavened bread. Then the Angel of the LORD vanished from his sight. 22When Gideon realized [without any doubt] that He was the Angel of the LORD, he declared, “Oh no, Lord GOD! For now I have seen the Angel of the LORD face to face [and I am doomed]!” 23The LORD said to him, “Peace to you, do not be afraid; you shall not die.” 24Then Gideon built an altar there to the LORD and named it The LORD is Peace. To this day it is still in Ophrah, of the Abiezrites.

25Now on that same night the LORD said to Gideon, “Take your father’s bull, the second bull seven years old, and tear down the altar of Baal that belongs to your father, and cut down the Asherah that is beside it; 26and build an altar to the LORD your God on top of this mountain stronghold [with stones laid down] in an orderly way. Then take the second bull and offer a burnt sacrifice using the wood of the Asherah which you shall cut down.” 27Then Gideon took ten men of his servants and did just as the LORD had told him; but because he was too afraid of his father’s household (relatives) and the men of the city to do it during daylight, he did it at night.

The Altar of Baal Destroyed 28Early the next morning when the men of the city got up, they discovered that the altar of Baal was torn down, and the Asherah which was beside it was cut down, and the second bull was offered on the altar which had been built. 29So they said to one another, “Who has done this thing?” When they searched about and inquired, they were told, “Gideon the son of Joash did it.” 30Then the men of the city said to Joash, “Bring out your son, so that he may be executed, because he has torn down the altar of Baal and cut down the Asherah which was beside it.” 31But Joash said to all who stood against him, “Will you plead for Baal? Will you save him? Whoever pleads for Baal shall be put to death while it is still morning. If Baal is a god, let him defend himself, because someone has torn down his altar.” 32Therefore on that day he named Gideon Jerubbaal, meaning, “Let Baal plead,” because he had torn down his altar.

33Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the people of the east assembled together; and they crossed over [the Jordan] and camped in the Valley of Jezreel. 34So the Spirit of the LORD clothed Gideon [and empowered him]; and he blew a trumpet, and the Abiezrites were called together [as a militia] to follow him. 35He sent messengers throughout [the tribe of] Manasseh, and the fighting men were also called together to follow him; and he sent messengers to [the tribes of] Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali, and they came up to meet them.

Sign of the Fleece 36Then Gideon said to God, “If You are going to rescue Israel through me, as You have spoken, 37behold, I will put a fleece of [freshly sheared] wool on the threshing floor. If there is dew only on the fleece, and it is dry on all the ground [around it], then I will know that You will rescue Israel through me, as You have said.” 38And it was so. When he got up early the next morning and squeezed the dew out of the fleece, he wrung from it a bowl full of water. 39Then Gideon said to God, “Do not let your anger burn against me, so that I may speak once more. Please let me make a test once more with the fleece; now let only the fleece be dry, and let there be dew on all the ground.” 40God did so that night; for it was dry only on the fleece, and there was dew on all the ground [around it].

Judges 7
Gideon’s 300 Chosen Men

1Then Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) and all the people who were with him got up early and camped beside the spring of Harod; and the camp of Midian was north of them by the hill of Moreh in the valley.

2Then the LORD said to Gideon, “There are too many people with you for Me to hand over Midian to them, otherwise Israel will boast [about themselves] against Me, saying, ‘My own power has rescued me.’ 3“So now, proclaim in the hearing of the people, ‘Whoever is afraid and trembling, let him turn back and leave Mount Gilead.’” So twenty-two thousand men returned [home], but ten thousand remained.

4Then the LORD said to Gideon, “There are still too many people; bring them down to the water and I will test them for you there. Therefore it shall be that he of whom I say to you, ‘This one shall go with you,’ he shall go with you; but everyone of whom I say to you, ‘This one shall not go with you,’ he shall not go.” 5So he brought the people down to the water, and the LORD said to Gideon, “You shall separate everyone who laps the water with his tongue as a dog laps, as well as everyone who kneels down to drink.” 6Now the number of those who lapped [the water], putting their hand to their mouth, was three hundred men, but all the rest of the people kneeled down to drink water. 7And the LORD told Gideon, “With the three hundred men who lapped I will rescue you, and will hand over the Midianites to you. Let all the other people go, each man to his home.” 8So the three hundred men took people’s provisions [for the journey] and their trumpets [made of rams’ horns] in their hands. And Gideon sent [away] all the other men of Israel, each to his tent, but kept the three hundred men. And the camp of Midian was below him in the valley.

9Now on that same night the LORD said to Gideon, “Arise, go down against their camp, for I have given it into your hand. 10But if you are afraid to go down [by yourself], go with Purah your servant down to the camp, 11and you will hear what they say; and afterward you will have the courage to go down against the camp.” Then he went down with Purah his servant to the outposts of the army that was in the camp. 12Now the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the sons of the east were lying [camped] in the valley, as countless as locusts; and their camels were without number, as numerous as the sand on the seashore. 13When Gideon arrived, there was a man telling a dream to his friend. And he said, “Listen carefully, I had a dream: there was a loaf of barley bread tumbling into the camp of Midian, and it came to the tent and struck it so that it fell, and turned it upside down so that the tent lay flat.” 14And his friend replied, “This [dream] is nothing less than the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel. God has given Midian and the entire camp into his hand.”

15When Gideon heard the account of the dream and its interpretation, he bowed down in worship. Then he returned to the camp of Israel and said, “Arise, for the LORD has given the camp of Midian into your hand.” 16He divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he put trumpets and empty pitchers into the hands of all of them, with torches inside the pitchers. 17And he said to them, “Look at me, then do likewise. When I come to the edge of the camp, do just as I do. 18“When I and all who are with me blow the trumpet (ram’s horn), then all around the camp you also blow the trumpets and shout, ‘For the LORD and for Gideon!’”

Confusion of the Enemy 19So Gideon and the hundred men who were with him came to the edge of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch, when the guards had just been changed, and they blew the trumpets and smashed the pitchers that were in their hands. 20When three companies blew the trumpets and broke the pitchers, they held the torches in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow, and they shouted, “A sword for the LORD and for Gideon!” 21Then each stood in his place around the camp; and the entire [Midianite] army ran, crying out as they fled. 22When Gideon’s men blew the three hundred trumpets, the LORD set the sword of one [Midianite] against another even throughout the whole army; and the army fled as far as Beth-shittah toward Zererah, as far as the border of Abel-meholah, by Tabbath. 23The men of Israel were summoned together from [the tribes of] Naphtali and Asher and all Manasseh, and they pursued Midian.

24Then Gideon sent messengers throughout the hill country of [the tribe of] Ephraim, saying, “Come down against the Midianites and take [control of] the waters before them [thereby cutting off the Midianites], as far as Beth-barah and the Jordan [River].” So all the men of Ephraim were assembled together and they took control of the waters, as far as Beth-barah and the Jordan. 25Then the men of Ephraim took the two leaders of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb, and they killed Oreb at the rock of Oreb, and they killed Zeeb at the wine press of Zeeb, and pursued Midian; and they brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon from across the Jordan.

Judges 8
Zebah And Zalmunna Routed

1And the men of [the tribe of] Ephraim said to Gideon, “What is this thing that you have done to us, not calling us when you went to fight with Midian?” And they quarreled with him vehemently. 2But he said to them, “What have I done now [that is so significant] in comparison with you? Is not the gleaning (leftovers) of the grapes of [your tribe of] Ephraim better than the vintage (entire harvest) of [my clan of] Abiezer? 3“God has given the leaders of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb into your hands; and what was I able to do in comparison with you?” Then their anger toward him subsided when he made this statement.

4So Gideon came to the Jordan and crossed over [the river], he and the three hundred men who were with him—exhausted, yet [still] pursuing [the enemy]. 5He said to the men of Succoth, “Please give loaves of bread to the people who are following me since they are exhausted, and I am pursuing Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian.” 6But the leaders of Succoth said, “Are Zebah and Zalmunna already in your hands, that we should give bread to your army?” 7Gideon said, “For that [response], when the LORD has handed over Zebah and Zalmunna to me, I will thrash your bodies with the thorns and briars of the wilderness.” 8He went from there up to Penuel and spoke similarly to them; and the men of Penuel answered him just as the men of Succoth had answered. 9So Gideon said also to the men of Penuel, “When I come again in peace, I will tear down this tower.”

10Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with their armies, about fifteen thousand [fighting] men, all who were left of the entire army of the sons of the east; for a hundred and twenty thousand swordsmen had fallen. 11Gideon went up by the route of those who lived in tents to the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and he attacked their camp when the camp was unsuspecting. 12When Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued them and captured the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and terrified the entire army.

13Then Gideon the son of Joash returned from the battle by the ascent of Heres. 14He captured a young man of Succoth and questioned him. And the youth wrote down for him [the names of] the leaders of Succoth and its elders, seventy-seven men. 15He came to the men of Succoth and said, “Look here, Zebah and Zalmunna, about whom you taunted me, saying, ‘Are Zebah and Zalmunna now in your hand, that we should give bread to your men who are exhausted?’” 16He took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briars, and with them he punished the men of Succoth. 17He tore down the tower of Penuel and killed the men of the city.

18Then Gideon said to Zebah and Zalmunna, “What kind of men were they whom you killed at Tabor?” And they replied, “They were like you, each one of them resembled the son of a king.” 19He said, “They were my brothers, the sons of my mother. As the LORD lives, if only you had let them live, I would not kill you.” 20So [to humiliate them] Gideon said to Jether his firstborn, “Stand up, and kill them!” But the youth did not draw his sword, because he was afraid, for he was still [just] a boy. 21Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, “Rise up yourself and strike us; for as the man is, so is his strength.” So Gideon arose and killed Zebah and Zalmunna, and took the crescent amulets that were on their camels’ necks.

22Then the men of Israel said to Gideon, “Rule [as king] over us, both you and your son, also your son’s son, for you have rescued us from the hand of Midian.” 23But Gideon said to them, “I will not rule over you, and my son will not rule over you; the LORD shall rule over you.” 24And Gideon said to them, “I would make a request of you, that each one of you give me an earring from his spoil.” For the Midianites had gold earrings, because they were Ishmaelites [who customarily wore them]. 25They answered, “We will certainly give them to you.” And they spread out a garment, and every one of them threw an earring there from his spoil. 26And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was seventeen hundred shekels of gold, apart from the crescent amulets and pendants and the purple garments which were worn by the kings of Midian, and apart from the chains that were on their camels’ necks. 27Gideon made [all the golden earrings into] an ephod [a sacred, high priest’s garment], and put it in his city of Ophrah, and all Israel worshiped it as an idol there, and it became a trap for Gideon and his household. Forty Years of Peace 28So Midian was subdued and humbled before the sons of Israel, and they no longer lifted up their heads [in pride]. And the land was at rest for forty years in the days of Gideon.

29Jerubbaal (Gideon) the son of Joash went and lived in his own house. 30Now Gideon had seventy sons born to him, because he had many wives. 31And his concubine who was in Shechem also bore him a son, whom he named Abimelech. 32Gideon the son of Joash died at a good advanced age and was buried in the tomb of Joash his father in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

33Then it came about, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the Israelites again played the prostitute with the Baals, and made Baal-berith their god. 34And the Israelites did not remember the LORD their God, who had rescued them from the hand of all their enemies on every side; 35nor did they show kindness to the family of Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) in return for all the good that he had done for Israel.

Judges 9
Abimelech’s Conspiracy

1Now Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal (Gideon) went to Shechem to his mother’s relatives, and said to them and to the whole clan of the household of his mother’s father, 2“Speak now in the hearing of all the leaders of Shechem, ‘Which is better for you, that seventy men, all of the sons of Jerubbaal rule over you, or that one man rule over you?’ Also, remember that I am your own bone and flesh.” 3So his mother’s relatives spoke all these words concerning him so that all the leaders of Shechem could hear; and their hearts were inclined to follow Abimelech, for they said, “He is our relative.” 4And they gave him seventy pieces of silver from the house of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech hired worthless and undisciplined men, and they followed (supported) him. 5Then he went to his father’s house at Ophrah and murdered his brothers the sons of Jerubbaal, seventy men, [in a public execution] on one stone. But Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left alive, because he had hidden himself. 6All the men of Shechem and all of Beth-millo assembled together, and they went and made Abimelech king, by the oak (terebinth) of the pillar (memorial stone) at Shechem.

7When they told Jotham, he went and stood at the top of Mount Gerizim and shouted to them, “Hear me, O men of Shechem, so that God may hear you. 8Once the trees went forth to anoint a king over them, and they said to the olive tree, ‘Reign over us!’ 9But the olive tree said to them, ‘Should I give up my fatness by which God and men are honored, and go to wave over the trees?’ 10Then the trees said to the fig tree, ‘You come and reign over us!’ 11But the fig tree said to them, ‘Should I give up my sweetness and my good fruit, and go to wave over the trees?’ 12Then the trees said to the vine, ‘You come and reign over us.’ 13And the vine replied, ‘Should I give up my new wine, which makes God and men happy, and go to wave over the trees?’ 14Then all the trees said to the bramble, ‘You come and reign over us.’ 15So the bramble said to the trees, ‘If in truth you are anointing me king over you, then come and take refuge in my shade; but if not, let fire come out of the bramble and devour the cedars of Lebanon.’

16“Now then, if you acted in truth and integrity when you made Abimelech king, and if you have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have dealt with him as he deserved— 17for my father fought for you and risked his life and rescued you from the hand of Midian; 18but you have risen against my father’s house today and have murdered his sons, seventy men, on one stone, and have made Abimelech, son of his maidservant, king over the people of Shechem, because he is your relative— 19if then you have acted in truth and integrity with Jerubbaal and his house this day, then rejoice in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you. 20“But if not, may fire come out from Abimelech and devour the people of Shechem and Beth-millo; and may fire come out from the people of Shechem and Beth-millo, and devour Abimelech.” 21Then Jotham escaped and fled, and went to Beer and lived there because of Abimelech his brother.

Shechem and Abimelech Fall 22Abimelech ruled over Israel for three years. 23Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the leaders of Shechem; and the leaders of Shechem acted treacherously against Abimelech, 24so that the violence done to the seventy sons of Jerubbaal (Gideon) might come [on the guilty], and that their [innocent] blood might be laid on Abimelech their brother, who had killed them, and on the leaders of Shechem, who strengthened his hands (encouraged him) to kill his brothers. 25The leaders of Shechem set men in ambush against Abimelech on the mountaintops, and they robbed all who passed by them along the road; and it was reported to Abimelech.

26Now Gaal the son of Ebed came with his relatives, and moved into Shechem; and the leaders of Shechem trusted him. 27They went out into the field, gathered the grapes of their vineyard and trod them, and held a festival; and they entered the house of their god, and they ate and drank, and cursed Abimelech. 28Gaal the son of Ebed said, “Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? Is he not [merely] the son of Jerubbaal and is Zebul not his lieutenant? Serve the men of Hamor the father (founder) of Shechem. Why then should we serve Abimelech? 29“If only this people were under my authority! Then I would remove Abimelech and say to him, ‘Increase [the size of] your army and come out [to fight].’”

30When Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger burned. 31He sent messengers to Abimelech secretly, saying, “Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his relatives have come to Shechem; and they are stirring up the city against you. 32Now then, get up during the night, you and the people who are with you, and set up an ambush in the field. 33“Then in the morning, at sunrise, you will get up early and rush upon and attack the city; and when Gaal and the people who are with him come out against you, you shall do to them whatever you can.”

34So Abimelech and all the people who were with him got up during the night, and set up an ambush against Shechem, in four companies. 35Now Gaal the son of Ebed came out and stood in the entrance of the city gate; then Abimelech and the people who were with him got up from the ambush. 36When Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, “Look, people are coming down from the mountaintops.” But Zebul said to him, “You are only seeing the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.” 37Gaal spoke again and said, “Look! People are coming down from the highest part of the land, and one company is coming by way of the sorcerers’ oak tree.” 38Then Zebul said to Gaal, “Where is your [boasting] mouth now, you who said, ‘Who is Abimelech that we should serve him?’ Is this not the people whom you despised? Go out now and fight with them!” 39So Gaal went out ahead of the leaders of Shechem and fought with Abimelech. 40Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him; and many fell wounded as far as the entrance of the gate. 41Then Abimelech stayed at Arumah, and Zebul drove out Gaal and his relatives so that they could not remain in Shechem.

42The next day the people went out to the field, and it was reported to Abimelech. 43So he took his people and divided them into three companies, and set an ambush in the field; and he looked and saw the people coming out of the city. And he rose up against them and struck them down. 44Then Abimelech and the company with him advanced forward and stood in the entrance of the city gate; the two other companies attacked all who were in the field and killed them. 45Abimelech fought against the city that entire day. He took the city and killed the people who were in it; he demolished the city and sowed it with salt.

46When all the leaders of the Tower of Shechem heard about it, they entered the inner chamber (stronghold) of the temple of El-berith (the god of a covenant). 47Abimelech was told that all the leaders of the Tower of Shechem were assembled together. 48So Abimelech went up to Mount Zalmon, he and all the people with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand and cut down a branch from the trees, picked it up, and laid it on his shoulder. And he said to the people with him, “What you have seen me do, hurry and do just as I have done.” 49So everyone of the people also cut down his branch and followed Abimelech, and they put the branches on top of the inner chamber and set it on fire over those inside, so that all the people in the Tower of Shechem also died, about a thousand men and women.

50Then Abimelech went to Thebez, and camped against Thebez and took it. 51But there was a strong (fortified) tower in the center of the city, and all the men and women with all the leaders of the city fled to it and shut themselves in; and they went up on the roof of the tower. 52So Abimelech came to the tower and fought against it, and approached the entrance of the tower to burn it down with fire. 53But a certain woman threw an upper millstone [down] on Abimelech’s head and crushed his skull. 54Then he called quickly to the young man who was his armor bearer, and said to him, “Draw your sword and kill me, so that it will not be said of me, ‘A woman killed him.’” So the young man pierced him through, and he died. 55When the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, each departed to his home. 56In this way God repaid the wickedness of Abimelech, which he had done to his father [Jerubbaal] by killing his seventy brothers. 57Also God repaid all the wickedness of the men of Shechem on their heads, and the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal (Gideon) came upon them.

Judges 10
Oppression Of Philistines And Ammonites

1After Abimelech died, Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, arose to save Israel; and he lived in Shamir, in the hill country of Ephraim. 2Tola judged Israel for twenty-three years; then he died and was buried in Shamir.

3After him, Jair the Gileadite arose, and he judged Israel for twenty-two years. 4He had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys, and they had thirty towns in the land of Gilead that are called Havvoth-jair (towns of Jair) to this day. 5And Jair died and was buried in Kamon.

6Then the Israelites again did what was evil in the sight of the LORD; they served the Baals, the Ashtaroth (female deities), the gods of Aram (Syria), the gods of Sidon, the gods of Moab, the gods of the Ammonites, and the gods of the Philistines. They abandoned the LORD and did not serve Him. 7So the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He sold them into the hands of the Philistines and the Ammonites, 8and they oppressed and crushed Israel that year. For eighteen years they oppressed all the Israelites who were beyond the Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead. 9The Ammonites crossed the Jordan to fight against Judah, Benjamin, and the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was greatly distressed.

10Then the Israelites cried out to the LORD [for help], saying, “We have sinned against You, because we have abandoned (rejected) our God and have served the Baals.” 11The LORD said to the Israelites, “Did I not rescue you from the Egyptians, the Amorites, the Ammonites, and the Philistines? 12Also when the Sidonians, the Amalekites, and the Maonites oppressed and crushed you, you cried out to Me, and I rescued you from their hands. 13Yet you have abandoned (rejected) Me and served other gods; therefore I will no longer rescue you. 14“Go, cry out to the gods you have chosen; let them rescue you in your time of distress.” 15The Israelites said to the LORD, “We have sinned, do to us whatever seems good to You; only please rescue us this day.” 16So they removed the foreign gods from among them and served the LORD; and He could bear the misery of Israel no longer.

17Then the Ammonites were assembled together and they camped in Gilead. And the sons of Israel assembled and camped at Mizpah. 18The people, the leaders of Gilead (Israel) said to one another, “Who is the man who will begin to fight against the Ammonites? He shall become head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.”

Judges 11
Jephthah The Ninth Judge

1Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a brave warrior, but he was the son of a prostitute. Gilead was the father of Jephthah. 2Gilead’s wife bore him sons, and when his wife’s sons grew up, they drove Jephthah out and said to him, “You shall not have an inheritance in our father’s house, because you are the son of another woman.” 3Then Jephthah fled from his brothers and lived in the land of Tob; and worthless and unprincipled men gathered around Jephthah, and went out [on raids] with him.

4Now it happened after a while that the Ammonites fought against Israel. 5When the Ammonites fought against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to get Jephthah from the land of Tob; 6and they said to Jephthah, “Come and be our leader, so that we may fight against the Ammonites.” 7But Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead, “Did you not hate me and drive me from the house of my father? Why have you come to me now when you are in trouble?” 8The elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “This is why we have turned to you now: that you may go with us and fight the Ammonites and become head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.” 9So Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead, “If you take me back [home] to fight against the Ammonites and the LORD gives them over to me, will I [really] become your head?” 10The elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “The LORD is the witness between us; be assured that we will do as you have said.” 11So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and leader over them. And Jephthah repeated everything that he had promised before the LORD at Mizpah.

12Now Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the Ammonites, saying, “What is [the problem] between you and me, that you have come against me to fight in my land?” 13The Ammonites’ king replied to the messengers of Jephthah, “It is because Israel took away my land when they came up from Egypt, from the [river] Arnon as far as the Jabbok and [east of] the Jordan; so now, return those lands peaceably.” 14But Jephthah sent messengers again to the king of the Ammonites, 15and they said to him, “This is what Jephthah says: ‘Israel did not take the land of Moab or the land of the Ammonites. 16‘For when they came up from Egypt, Israel walked through the wilderness to the Red Sea and came to Kadesh; 17then Israel sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, “Please let us pass through your land,” but the king of Edom would not listen. Also they sent word to the king of Moab, but he would not consent. So Israel stayed at Kadesh. 18‘Then they went through the wilderness and went around the land of Edom and the land of Moab, and came to the east side of the land of Moab, and they camped on the other side of the [river] Arnon; but they did not enter the territory of Moab, for the Arnon was the [northern] boundary of Moab. 19‘Then Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, king of Heshbon, and Israel said to him, “Please let us pass through your land to our place.” 20‘But Sihon did not trust Israel to pass through his territory; so Sihon gathered together all his people and camped at Jahaz and fought against Israel. 21‘The LORD, the God of Israel, gave Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they defeated them; so Israel took possession of all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country. 22‘They took possession of all the territory of the Amorites, from the Arnon as far as the Jabbok, and from the wilderness [westward] as far as the Jordan. 23‘And now the LORD God of Israel has dispossessed and driven out the Amorites from before His people Israel, so [why] should you possess it? 24‘Do you not possess what Chemosh your god gives you to possess? And everything that the LORD our God dispossessed before us, we will possess. 25‘Now are you any better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever go to war against them? 26‘While Israel lived in Heshbon and its villages, and in Aroer and its villages, and in all the cities along the banks of the Arnon for three hundred years, why did you not recover your lost lands during that time? 27‘So I have not sinned against you, but you are doing me wrong by making war against me; may the LORD, the [righteous] Judge, judge this day between the Israelites and the Ammonites.’” 28But the king of the Ammonites disregarded the message of Jephthah, which he sent to him.

Jephthah’s Tragic Vow 29Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed through Gilead and Manasseh, and Mizpah of Gilead, and from Mizpah of Gilead he passed on to the Ammonites. 30Jephthah made a vow to the LORD and said, “If You will indeed give the Ammonites into my hand, 31then whatever comes out of the doors of my house to meet me when I return in peace from the Ammonites, it shall be the LORD’S, and I will offer it up as a burnt offering.” 32Then Jephthah crossed over to the Ammonites to fight with them; and the LORD gave them into his hand. 33And from Aroer to the entrance of Minnith he struck them, twenty cities, and as far as Abel-keramim (brook by the vineyard), with a very great defeat. So the Ammonites were subdued and humbled before the Israelites.

34Then Jephthah came to his house at Mizpah, and this is what he saw: his daughter coming out to meet him with tambourines and with dancing. And she was his only child; except for her he had no son or daughter. 35And when he saw her, he tore his clothes [in grief] and said, “Alas, my daughter! You have brought me great disaster, and you are the cause of ruin to me; for I have made a vow to the LORD, and I cannot take it back.” 36And she said to him, “My father, you have made a vow to the LORD; do to me as you have vowed, since the LORD has taken vengeance for you on your enemies, the Ammonites.” 37And she said to her father, “Let this one thing be done for me; let me alone for two months, so that I may go to the mountains and weep over my virginity, I and my companions.” 38And he said, “Go.” So he sent her away for two months; and she left with her companions, and wept over her virginity on the mountains. 39At the end of two months she returned to her father, who did to her as he had vowed; and she had no relations with a man. It became a custom in Israel, 40that the daughters of Israel went yearly to tell the story of the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in the year.

Judges 12
Jephthah And His Successors

1The men of [the tribe of] Ephraim were summoned [to action], and they crossed over to Zaphon and said to Jephthah, “Why did you cross over to fight with the Ammonites without calling us to go with you? [For that] we will burn your house down upon you.” 2And Jephthah said to them, “My people and I were in a major conflict with the Ammonites, and when I called you [for help], you did not rescue me from their hand. 3“So when I saw that you were not coming to help me, I took my life in my hands and crossed over against the Ammonites, and the LORD handed them over to me. So why have you come up to me this day to fight against me?” 4Then Jephthah assembled all the men of Gilead and fought with [the tribe of] Ephraim; and the men of Gilead defeated Ephraim, because they had said, “You Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim, in the midst of [the tribes of] Ephraim and Manasseh.” 5And the Gileadites took the fords of the Jordan opposite the Ephraimites; and when any of the fugitives of Ephraim said, “Let me cross over,” the men of Gilead would say to him, “Are you an Ephraimite?” If he said, “No,” 6they said to him, “Then say ‘Shibboleth.’” And he said, “Sibboleth,” for he could not pronounce it correctly. Then they seized him and killed him at the fords of the Jordan. At that time forty-two thousand of the Ephraimites fell.

7Jephthah judged Israel for six years. Then Jephthah the Gileadite died and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.

8And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel. 9He had thirty sons, and thirty daughters whom he gave in marriage outside the family, and he brought in thirty daughters [-in-law] from outside for his sons. He judged Israel for seven years. 10Then Ibzan died and was buried at Bethlehem.

11After him Elon the Zebulunite judged Israel; and he judged Israel for ten years. 12Then Elon the Zebulunite died and was buried at Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.

13Now after him Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel. 14He had forty sons and thirty grandsons who rode on seventy donkeys; and he judged Israel for eight years. 15Then Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died and was buried at Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill country of the Amalekites.

Judges 13
Philistines Oppress Again

1Now Israel again did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, and the LORD gave them into the hands of the Philistines for forty years.

2And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was infertile and had no children. 3And the Angel of the LORD appeared to the woman and said to her, “Behold, you are infertile and have no children, but you shall conceive and give birth to a son. 4Therefore, be careful not to drink wine or [any other] intoxicating drink, and do not eat anything [ceremonially] unclean. 5“For behold, you shall conceive and give birth to a son. No razor shall come upon his head, for the boy shall be a Nazirite [dedicated] to God from birth; and he shall begin to rescue Israel from the hands of the Philistines.” 6Then the woman went and told her husband, saying, “A Man of God came to me and his appearance was like the appearance of the Angel of God, very awesome. I did not ask Him where he came from, and he did not tell me his name. 7“But He said to me, ‘Behold, you shall conceive and give birth to a son, and now you shall not drink wine or [any other] intoxicating drink, nor eat anything [ceremonially] unclean, for the boy shall be a Nazirite to God from birth to the day of his death.’”

8Then Manoah pleaded with the LORD and said, “O Lord, please let the Man of God whom You sent come again to us and teach us what we are to do for the boy who is to be born.” 9And God listened to the voice of Manoah; and the Angel of God came again to the woman as she sat in the field, but Manoah her husband was not with her. 10So the woman ran quickly and told her husband, “Behold, the Man who came to me the other day has appeared to me.” 11Then Manoah got up and followed his wife, and came to the Man and said to him, “Are you the Man who spoke to this woman?” He said, “I am.” 12And Manoah said, “Now when your words come true, what shall be the boy’s manner of life, and his vocation?” 13The Angel of the LORD said to Manoah, “The woman must pay attention to everything that I said to her. 14“She may not eat anything that comes from the vine nor drink wine or [any other] intoxicating drink, nor eat anything [ceremonially] unclean. She shall observe everything that I commanded her.”

15Then Manoah said to the Angel of the LORD, “Please let us detain you and let us prepare a young goat for you [to eat].” 16The Angel of the LORD said to Manoah, “Though you detain me, I will not eat your food, but if you prepare a burnt offering, offer it to the LORD.” For Manoah did not know that he was the Angel of the LORD. 17Manoah said to the Angel of the LORD, “What is your name, so that when your words come true, we may honor you?” 18But the Angel of the LORD said to him, “Why do you ask my name, seeing it is wonderful (miraculous)?” 19So Manoah took the young goat with the grain offering and offered it on the rock to the LORD, and He performed miracles while Manoah and his wife looked on. 20For when the flame went up toward heaven from the altar, the Angel of the LORD ascended in the altar flame. When Manoah and his wife saw this they fell on their faces to the ground.

21The Angel of the LORD did not appear again to Manoah or his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was the Angel of the LORD. 22So Manoah said to his wife, “We will certainly die, because we have seen God.” 23But his [sensible] wife said to him, “If the LORD had desired to kill us, He would not have received a burnt offering and a grain offering from our hands, nor would He have shown us all these things, nor would He have announced such things as these at this time.”

24So the woman [in due time] gave birth to a son and named him Samson; and the boy grew and the LORD blessed him. 25And the Spirit of the LORD began to stir him at times in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.

Judges 14
Samson’s Marriage

1Samson went down to Timnah and at Timnah he saw a woman, one of the daughters of the Philistines. 2So he went back and told his father and his mother, “I saw a woman in Timnah, one of the daughters of the Philistines; now get her for me as a wife.” 3But his father and mother said to him, “Is there no woman among the daughters of your relatives, or among all our people, that you must go to take a wife from the uncircumcised (pagan) Philistines?” And Samson said to his father, “Get her for me, because she looks pleasing to me.” 4His father and mother did not know that it was of the LORD, and that He was seeking an occasion [to take action] against the Philistines. Now at that time the Philistines were ruling over Israel.

5Then Samson went down to Timnah with his father and mother [to arrange the marriage], and they came as far as the vineyards of Timnah; and suddenly, a young lion came roaring toward him. 6The Spirit of the LORD came upon him mightily, and he tore the lion apart as one tears apart a young goat, and he had nothing at all in his hand; but he did not tell his father or mother what he had done. 7So he went down and talked with the woman; and she looked pleasing to Samson. 8When he returned later to take her, he turned aside to see the carcass of the lion; and behold, a swarm of bees and honey were in the body of the lion. 9So he scraped the honey out into his hands and went on, eating as he went. When he came to his father and mother, he gave them some, and they ate it; but he did not tell them he had taken the honey from the body of the lion.

10His father went down to the woman, and Samson prepared a feast there, for that was the customary thing for young men to do. 11When the people saw him, they brought thirty companions (wedding attendants) to be with him. Samson’s Riddle 12Then Samson said to them, “Let me now ask you a riddle; if you can tell me what it is within the seven days of the feast, and solve it, then I will give you thirty linen tunics (undergarments) and thirty changes of [outer] clothing. 13“But if you are unable to tell me [the answer], then you shall give me thirty linen tunics (undergarments) and thirty changes of [outer] clothing.” And they said to him, “Ask your riddle, so that we may hear it.” 14So he said to them,
“Out of the eater came something to eat,
And out of the strong came something sweet.”
And they could not solve the riddle in three days.

15Then on the fourth day they said to Samson’s wife, “Persuade your husband to tell us [through you] the riddle, or we will burn you and your father’s household with fire. Have you invited us to make us poor? Is this not true?” 16So Samson’s wife wept before him and said, “You only hate me, you do not love me; you have asked my countrymen a riddle, and have not told [the answer] to me.” And he said to her, “Listen, I have not told my father or my mother [either], so [why] should I tell you?” 17However Samson’s wife wept before him seven days while their [wedding] feast lasted, and on the seventh day he told her because she pressed him so hard. Then she told the riddle to her countrymen. 18So the men of the city said to Samson on the seventh day before sundown,
“What is sweeter than honey?
What is stronger than a lion?”
And he said to them,
“If you had not plowed with my heifer,
You would not have solved my riddle.”

19Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon him mightily, and he went down to Ashkelon and killed thirty of them and took their gear, and gave changes of clothes to those who had explained the riddle. And his anger burned, and he went up to his father’s house. 20But Samson’s wife was given to his companion who had been his friend.

Judges 15
Samson Burns Philistine Crops

1But after a while, in the time of wheat harvest, Samson went to visit his wife with a young goat [as a gift of reconciliation]; and he said, “I will go in to my wife in her room.” But her father would not allow him to go in. 2Her father said, “I really thought you utterly hated her; so I gave her to your companion. Is her younger sister not more beautiful than she? Please take her [as your wife] instead.” 3Samson said to them, “This time I shall be blameless in regard to the Philistines when I do them harm.” 4So Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took torches and turning the foxes tail to tail, he put a torch between each pair of tails. 5When he had set the torches ablaze, he let the foxes go into the standing grain of the Philistines, and he burned up the heap of sheaves and the standing grain, along with the vineyards and olive groves. 6Then the Philistines said, “Who did this?” And they were told, “Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite, because he took Samson’s wife and gave her to his [chief] companion [at the wedding feast].” So the Philistines came up and burned her and her father with fire. 7Samson said to them, “If this is the way you act, be certain that I will take revenge on you, and [only] after that I will stop.” 8Then he struck them without mercy, a great slaughter; and he went down and lived in the cleft of the rock of Etam.

9Then the [army of the] Philistines came up and camped in [the tribal territory of] Judah, and overran Lehi (Jawbone). 10The men of Judah said, “Why have you come up against us?” And they answered, “We have come up to bind Samson, in order to do to him as he has done to us.” 11Then three thousand men of Judah went down to the cleft of the rock of Etam and said to Samson, “Have you not known that the Philistines are rulers over us? What is this that you have done to us?” He said to them, “As they did to me, so I have done to them.” 12They said to him, “We have come down to bind you, so that we may hand you over to the Philistines.” And Samson said to them, “Swear to me that you will not kill me.” 13So they said to him, “No, we will [only] bind you securely and place you into their hands; but we certainly will not kill you.” So they bound him with two new ropes and brought him up from the rock [of Etam].

14When he came to Lehi, the Philistines came shouting to meet him. And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him mightily, and the ropes on his arms were like flax (linen) that had been burned, and his bonds dropped off his hands. 15He found a fresh jawbone of a donkey, so he reached out his hand and took it and killed a thousand men with it. 16Then Samson said,
“With the jawbone of a donkey,
Heaps upon heaps,
With the jawbone of a donkey
I have struck down a thousand men.”

17When he finished speaking, he threw the jawbone from his hand; and he named that place Ramath-lehi (hill of the jawbone). 18Then Samson was very thirsty, and he called out to the LORD and said, “You have given this great victory through the hand of Your servant, and now am I to die of thirst and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised (pagans)?” 19So God split open the hollow place that was at Lehi, and water came out of it. When Samson drank, his spirit (strength) returned and he was revived. Therefore he named it En-hakkore (spring which is calling), which is at Lehi to this day. 20And Samson judged Israel in the days of [occupation by] the Philistines for twenty years.

Judges 16
Samson’s Weakness

1Then Samson went to Gaza and saw a prostitute there, and went in to her. 2The Gazites were told, “Samson has come here.” So they surrounded the place and waited all night at the gate of the city to ambush him. They kept quiet all night, saying, “In the morning, when it is light, we will kill him.” 3But Samson lay [resting] until midnight, then at midnight he got up and took hold of the doors of the city gate and the two door-posts, and pulled them up, [security] bar and all, and he put them on his shoulders and carried them up to the top of the hill which is opposite Hebron.

4After this he fell in love with a [Philistine] woman [living] in the Valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah. 5So the [five] lords (governors) of the Philistines came to her and said to her, “Persuade him, and see where his great strength lies and [find out] how we may overpower him so that we may bind him to subdue him. And each of us will give you eleven hundred pieces of silver.” 6So Delilah said to Samson, “Please tell me where your great strength lies and with what you may be bound and subdued.” 7Samson said to her, “If they bind me with seven fresh cords (tendons) that have not been dried, then I will be weak and be like any [other] man.” 8Then the Philistine lords brought her seven fresh cords that had not been dried, and she bound him with them. 9Now she had men lying in ambush in an inner room. And she said to him, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” And he broke the cords as a string of tow breaks when it touches fire. So [the secret of] his strength was not discovered.

10Then Delilah said to Samson, “See now, you have mocked me and told me lies; now please tell me [truthfully] how you may be bound.” 11He said to her, “If they bind me tightly with new ropes that have not been used, then I will become weak and be like any [other] man.” 12So Delilah took new ropes and bound him with them and said to him, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” And the men lying in ambush were in the inner room. But he snapped the ropes off his arms like [sewing] thread.

13Then Delilah said to Samson, “Until now you have mocked me and told me lies; tell me [truthfully] with what you may be bound.” And he said to her, “If you weave the seven braids of my hair with the web [and fasten it with a pin, then I will become weak and be like any other man.” 14So while he slept, Delilah took the seven locks (braids) of his hair and wove them into the web]. And she fastened it with the pin [of the loom] and said to him, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” And he awoke from his sleep and pulled out the pin of the [weaver’s] loom and the web.

Delilah Extracts His Secret 15Then she said to him, “How can you say, ‘I love you,’ when your heart is not with me? You have mocked me these three times and have not told me where your great strength lies.” 16When she pressured him day after day with her words and pleaded with him, he was annoyed to death. 17Then [finally] he told her everything that was in his heart and said to her, “A razor has never been used on my head, for I have been a Nazirite to God from my mother’s womb. If I am shaved, then my strength will leave me, and I will become weak and be like any [other] man.”

18Then Delilah realized that he had told her everything in his heart, so she sent and called for the Philistine lords, saying, “Come up this once, because he has told me everything in his heart.” Then the Philistine lords came up to her and brought the money [they had promised] in their hands. 19She made Samson sleep on her knees, and she called a man and had him shave off the seven braids of his head. Then she began to abuse Samson, and his strength left him. 20She said, “The Philistines are upon you, Samson!” And he awoke from his sleep and said, “I will go out as I have time after time and shake myself free.” For Samson did not know that the LORD had departed from him. 21Then the Philistines seized him and gouged out his eyes; and they brought him down to Gaza and bound him with [two] bronze chains; and he was forced to be a grinder [of grain into flour at the mill] in the prison. 22But the hair of his head began to grow again after it had been shaved off.

23Now the Philistine lords gathered together to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon their god, and to celebrate, for they said,
“Our god has given Samson our enemy into our hands!”

24When the people saw Samson, they praised their god, for they said,
“Our god has handed over our enemy to us,
The ravager of our country,
Who has killed many of us.”

25Now when they were in high spirits, they said, “Call for Samson, so that he may amuse us.” So they called Samson out of the prison, and he entertained them. They made him stand between the pillars. 26Then Samson said to the boy who held him by the hand, “Let me feel the pillars on which the [roof of the] house rests, so that I may lean against them.” 27Now the house was full of men and women; all the Philistine lords were there, and on the flat roof were about three thousand men and women who looked on while Samson was entertaining them.

Samson Is Avenged 28Then Samson called to the LORD and said, “O Lord GOD, please remember me and please strengthen me just this one time, O God, and let me take vengeance on the Philistines for my two eyes.” 29Samson took hold of the two middle [support] pillars on which the house rested, and braced himself against them, one with his right hand and the other with his left. 30And Samson said, “Let me die with the Philistines!” And he stretched out with all his might [collapsing the support pillars], and the house fell on the lords and on all the people who were in it. So the dead whom he killed at his death were more than those whom he had killed during his life. 31Then his brothers and his father’s entire [tribal] household came down, took him, and brought him up; and they buried him in the tomb of Manoah his father, [which was] between Zorah and Eshtaol. So Samson had judged Israel for twenty years.

Judges 17
Micah’s Idolatry

1There was a man of the hill country of Ephraim whose name was Micah. 2And he said to his mother, “The eleven hundred pieces of silver which were taken from you, about which you cursed [the thief] and also spoke about in my hearing, behold, the silver is with me; I took it.” And his mother said, “Blessed be my son before the LORD.” 3He returned the eleven hundred pieces of silver to his mother, and she said, “I had truly dedicated the silver from my hand to the LORD for my son (in his name) to make an image [carved from wood and plated with silver] and a cast image [of solid silver]; so now, I will return it to you.” 4So when he returned the silver to his mother, she took two hundred pieces of silver and gave them to the silversmith who made of it an image [of silver-plated wood] and a cast image [of solid silver]; and they were in the house of Micah. 5Now the man Micah had a house of gods (shrine), and he made an ephod and teraphim and dedicated and installed one of his sons, who became his [personal] priest. 6In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did what was right in his own eyes.

7Now there was a young man from Bethlehem in Judah, from the family [of the tribe] of Judah, who was a Levite; and he was staying there [temporarily]. 8Then the man left the town of Bethlehem in Judah, to stay wherever he could find a place; and as he journeyed, he came to the hill country of Ephraim, to the house of Micah. 9Micah said to him, “Where do you come from?” And he said to him, “I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah, and I am going to stay wherever I can find a place.” 10And Micah said to him, “Live here with me and be a father and a [personal] priest to me, and I will give you ten pieces of silver each year, a supply of clothing, and your sustenance (room and board).” So the Levite went in. 11The Levite agreed to live with the man, and the young man became to Micah like one of his sons. 12So Micah dedicated (installed) the Levite, and the young man became his priest and lived in the house of Micah. 13Then Micah said, “Now I know that the LORD will favor me and make me prosper because I have a Levite as my priest.”

Judges 18
Danites Seek Territory

1In those days there was no king in Israel; and in those days the tribe of the Danites was seeking an inheritance [of land] for themselves to live in, for until then an inheritance had not been allotted to them as a possession among the tribes of Israel. 2So the sons of Dan sent from the total number of their [extended] family five brave men from Zorah and Eshtaol, to scout the land and to explore it; and they said to them, “Go, explore the land.” They came to the hill country of Ephraim, to the house of Micah, and lodged there. 3When they passed near Micah’s house, they recognized the voice of the young man, the Levite, and they turned aside there and said to him, “Who brought you here? And what are you doing in this place? And what do you have here?” 4And he said to them, “Micah has done this and that for me, and he has hired me and I have become his priest.” 5And they said to him, “Please ask of God, so that we may know whether our journey on which we are going will be successful.” 6The priest said to them, “Go in peace; the journey on which you are going is acceptable to the LORD.”

7Then the five men went on and came to Laish and saw the people who were there, [how they were] living securely in the style of the Sidonians, quiet and peaceful; and there was no oppressive magistrate in the land humiliating them in anything, and they were far from the Sidonians and had no dealings with anyone. 8The five men came back [home] to their brothers at Zorah and Eshtaol, and their brothers said to them, “What do you have to report?” 9They said, “Arise, let us go up against them; for we have seen the land, and behold, it is very good (fertile). Will you sit still and do nothing? Do not hesitate to go, to enter, to take possession of the land. 10“When you enter, you will come to people [feeling] safe and secure with a spacious land [widely extended on all sides]; for God has given it into your hands—a place where there is no lack of anything that is on the earth.”

11Then from the [tribal] family of the Danites, from Zorah and from Eshtaol, six hundred men armed with weapons of war set out. 12They went up and camped at Kiriath-jearim in Judah. Therefore they have called that place Mahaneh-dan to this day; it is west of Kiriath-jearim. 13They went on from there to the hill country of Ephraim and came to Micah’s house.

Danites Take Micah’s Idols 14Then the five men who had gone to scout the country of Laish said to their relatives, “Do you know that there are in these houses an ephod, teraphim, an image [of silver-plated wood], and a cast image [of solid silver]? Now therefore, consider what you should do.” 15So they turned in that direction and came to the house of the young Levite, at the home of Micah, and asked him how he was doing. 16Now the six hundred men armed with their weapons of war, who were of the sons of Dan, stood at the entrance of the gate. 17Now the five men who had gone to scout the land went up and entered the house and took the image [of silver-plated wood], the ephod, the teraphim, and the cast image [of solid silver], while the priest stood by the entrance of the gate with the six hundred men armed with weapons of war. 18When these [five men] went into Micah’s house and took the [plated] image, the ephod, the teraphim, and the cast image, the priest asked them, “What are you doing?” 19They said to him, “Keep quiet, put your hand over your mouth and come with us, and be a father and a priest to us. Is it better for you to be a priest to the house of one man, or to be a priest to a tribe and family in Israel?” 20The priest’s heart was glad [to hear that], and he took the ephod, the teraphim, and the image, and went among the people.

21So they turned and left, and they put the children, the livestock, and the valuables and supplies in front of them. 22When they had gone some distance from the house of Micah, the men who were [living] in the houses near Micah’s house assembled [as a militia] and overtook the sons of Dan. 23They shouted to the Danites, who turned and said to Micah, “What is your reason for assembling [against us]?” 24He said, “You have taken away my gods which I have made, and the priest, and have gone away; what else do I have left? How can you say to me, ‘What is your reason?’” 25The sons of Dan said to him, “Do not let your voice [of complaint] be heard among us, or else angry men will assault you and you will lose your life, along with the lives of [everyone in] your household.” 26Then the Danites went on their way; and Micah saw that they were too strong for him, so he turned and went back to his house.

27They took the [idolatrous] things that Micah had made, and his priest, and they came to Laish, to a people who were quiet and secure; and they struck them with the edge of the sword and burned the city with fire. 28And there was no one to rescue them because it was far from Sidon and they had no dealings with anyone. It was in the valley which belongs to Beth-rehob. And they rebuilt the city and lived in it. 29They named the city Dan, after Dan their forefather who was born to Israel (Jacob); however, the original name of the city was Laish. 30The [tribe of] the sons of Dan set up the image [of silver-plated wood] for themselves; and Jonathan the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, and his sons were priests to the tribe of the Danites until the day of the captivity and exile from the land. 31So they set up for themselves Micah’s [silver-plated wooden] image which he had made, and kept it throughout the time that the house (tabernacle) of God was at Shiloh.

Judges 19
A Levite’s Concubine Degraded

1Now it happened in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that a certain Levite living [as an alien] in the most remote part of the hill country of Ephraim, who took a concubine for himself from Bethlehem in Judah. 2But his concubine was unfaithful to him, and left him and went to her father’s house in Bethlehem of Judah, and stayed there for a period of four months. 3Then her husband arose and went after her to speak kindly and tenderly to her in order to bring her back, taking with him his servant and a pair of donkeys. So she brought him into her father’s house, and when the father of the girl saw him, he was happy to meet him. 4So his father-in-law, the girl’s father, detained him; and he stayed there with him for three days. So they ate and drank, and he lodged there. 5On the fourth day they got up early in the morning, and the Levite prepared to leave; but the girl’s father said to his son-in-law, “Strengthen yourself with a piece of bread, and afterward go your way.” 6So both men sat down and ate and drank together; and the girl’s father said to the man, “Please be willing to spend the night and enjoy yourself.” 7Then the man got up to leave, but his father-in-law urged him [strongly to remain]; so he spent the night there again. 8On the fifth day he got up early in the morning to leave, but the girl’s father said, “Please strengthen yourself, and wait until the end of the day.” So both of them ate. 9When the man and his concubine and his servant got up to leave, his father-in-law, the girl’s father, said to him, “Behold, now the day has drawn to a close; please spend the night. Look, now the day comes to an end; spend the night here and celebrate, enjoy yourself. Then tomorrow you may get up early for your journey and go home.”

10But the man was not willing to stay the night; so he got up and left and came to a place opposite Jebus (that is Jerusalem). With him were two saddled donkeys [and his servant] and his concubine. 11When they were near Jebus, the day was almost gone, and the servant said to his master, “Please come and let us turn aside into this Jebusite city and spend the night in it.” 12But his master said to him, “We will not turn aside into a city of foreigners who are not of the sons (descendants) of Israel. We will go on as far as Gibeah.” 13And he said to his servant, “Come and let us approach one of these places: and we will spend the night in Gibeah or in Ramah.” 14So they passed by and went on their way, and the sun set on them near Gibeah, which belongs to [the tribe of] Benjamin, 15and they turned aside there to go in and spend the night in Gibeah. And the Levite went in and sat down in the open square of the city, because no man invited them into his house to spend the night.

16Then behold, there was an old man who was coming out of the field from his work at evening. He was from the hill country of Ephraim but was staying in Gibeah, and the men of the place were sons (descendants) of Benjamin. 17When he looked up, he saw the traveler [and his companions] in the city square; and the old man said, “Where are you going, and where do you come from?” 18The Levite replied, “We are passing through from Bethlehem [in the territory] of Judah to the most remote part of the hill country of Ephraim; I am from there. I went to Bethlehem of Judah, but I am now going [home] to my house, and there is no man [in the city] who will take me into his house [for the night]. 19“Yet we have both straw and feed for our donkeys, and also bread and wine for me, and for your handmaid, and for the young man who is with your servant; there is no lack of anything.” 20Then the old man said, “Peace be to you. Only leave all your needs to me; and do not spend the night in the open square.” 21So he brought him into his house and fed the donkeys; and they washed their feet and ate and drank.

22While they were celebrating, behold, men of the city, certain worthless and evil men, surrounded the house, pounding on the door; and they spoke to the master of the house, the old man, saying, “Bring out the man who came to your house so that we may have relations with him.” 23Then the man, the master of the house, went out and said to them, “No, my fellow citizens, please do not act so wickedly. Since this man has come to my house [as my guest], do not commit this sacrilege. 24“Here is my virgin daughter and this man’s concubine. I will bring them out now; abuse and humiliate them and do to them whatever you want, but do not commit this act of sacrilege against this man.” 25But the men would not listen to him. So the man took the Levite’s concubine and brought her outside to them; and they had relations with her and abused her all night until morning; and when daybreak came, they let her go. 26At daybreak the woman came and collapsed at the door of the man’s house where her master was, until it was [fully] light.

27When her master got up in the morning and opened the doors of the house and went out to go on his way, he saw his concubine lying at the door of the house, and her hands were on the threshold. 28He said to her, “Get up, and let us go.” But there was no answer [for she had died]. Then he put her [body] on the donkey; and the man left and went home. 29When he arrived at his house, he took a knife, and taking hold of his [dead] concubine, he cut her [corpse] limb by limb into twelve pieces, and sent her [body parts] throughout all the territory of Israel. 30All who saw the dismembered parts said, “Nothing like this has ever happened or been seen from the day that the sons of Israel came up from the land of Egypt to this day. Consider it, take counsel, and speak [your minds]!”

Judges 20
Resolve To Punish The Guilty

1Then all the sons of Israel from Dan [in the north] to Beersheba [in the south], including the land of Gilead came out, and the congregation assembled as one man to the LORD at Mizpah. 2The chiefs of all the people of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand men on foot who drew the sword. 3(Now the Benjamites [in whose territory the crime was committed] heard that the [other tribes of the] sons of Israel had gone up to Mizpah.) And the sons of Israel said, “How did this evil thing happen?” 4So the Levite, the husband of the woman who was murdered, replied, “I had come with my concubine to spend the night in Gibeah, [a town] which belongs to [the tribe of] Benjamin. 5But the men of Gibeah rose up against me and surrounded the house at night because of me. They intended to kill me, but instead they raped my concubine [so brutally] that she died. 6So I took my concubine and cut her [corpse] in pieces and sent her [body parts] throughout the land of the inheritance of Israel; for the men of Gibeah have committed a lewd and disgraceful act in Israel. 7“Now then, all you sons of Israel, all of you, give your advice and counsel here [regarding what should be done].”

8Then all the people stood [unified] as one man, saying, “None of us will go to his tent, and none of us will return to his home [until this is settled]. 9But now this is the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we will go up by lot against it, 10and we will take ten men out of a hundred throughout the tribes of Israel, and a hundred out of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand to bring provisions for the men, so that when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, they may punish them for all the despicable acts which they have committed in Israel.” 11So all the men of Israel assembled against the city, united as one man.

12Then the tribes of Israel sent men through the entire tribe of Benjamin, saying, “What is this evil thing that has been done among you? 13“Now therefore, turn over the men [involved], the worthless and wicked men in Gibeah, so that we may put them to death and remove this wickedness from Israel.” But the Benjamites would not listen to the voice of their brothers, the sons of Israel. 14Then the [tribe of the] sons of Benjamin gathered from the cities to Gibeah, to go out to battle against the [other] sons of Israel. 15And the Benjamites assembled out of their cities at that time twenty-six thousand men who drew the sword, besides the inhabitants of Gibeah, who assembled seven hundred chosen men. 16Out of all these people were seven hundred choice left-handed men; each one could sling stones at [a target no wider than] a hair and not miss.

17Then the men of Israel, other than Benjamin, assembled four hundred thousand men who drew the sword; all of these were men of war.

Civil War, Benjamin Defeated 18The men of Israel arose and went up to Bethel and asked of God and said, “Which of us shall take the lead to battle against the sons [tribe] of Benjamin?” And the LORD said, “Judah [shall go up] first.”

19Then the [fighting men of the] sons of Israel arose in the morning and camped against Gibeah. 20The men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin, and assembled in battle formation against them at Gibeah. 21The sons of Benjamin came out of Gibeah and struck to the ground on that day twenty-two thousand [fighting] men of Israel. 22But the people, the [fighting] men of Israel, took courage and strengthened themselves and again set their battle line in the same place where they formed it the first day. 23The sons of Israel went up and wept before the LORD until evening, and asked of the LORD, “Shall we advance again to battle against the sons of our brother Benjamin?” And the LORD said, “Go up against them.”

24So the sons of Israel came against the sons of Benjamin the second day. 25And [the fighting men from the tribe of] Benjamin went out of Gibeah against them the second day and again struck to the ground the sons of Israel, eighteen thousand men, all of whom were swordsmen. 26Then all the sons of Israel and all the people went up and came to Bethel and wept; and they sat there before the LORD and fasted that day until evening and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD. 27And the sons of Israel inquired of the LORD (for the ark of the covenant of God was there [at Bethel] in those days, 28and Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, ministered before it in those days), saying, “Shall I yet again go out to battle against the sons of my brother Benjamin, or shall I quit?” And the LORD said, “Go up, for tomorrow I will hand them over to you.”

29So Israel set men in ambush around Gibeah. 30The [fighting men of the] sons of Israel went up against the sons of Benjamin on the third day and placed themselves in battle formation against Gibeah as at other times. 31The Benjamites went out against their army and were lured away from the city, and they began to strike and kill some of the people as at other times, on the highways, one of which goes up to Bethel and the other to Gibeah, and in the open country, about thirty men of Israel. 32And the Benjamites said, “They are defeated before us, as at the first.” But the sons of Israel said, “Let us flee and lure them away from the city to the highways.” 33Then all the men of Israel got up from their places and placed themselves in battle formation at Baal-tamar; and the men of Israel [who were] in ambush rushed from their place in the plain of Maareh-geba. 34When the ten thousand choice [fighting] men from all Israel came against Gibeah, the battle was hard and fierce; but the Benjamites did not realize that disaster was about to strike them. 35And the LORD struck down [the tribe of] Benjamin before Israel, so that the sons of Israel destroyed twenty-five thousand one hundred men of Benjamin that day, all of whom were swordsmen.

36So the Benjamites realized that they were defeated. Then men of Israel gave ground to the Benjamites, because they relied on the men in ambush whom they had placed against Gibeah. 37Then the men in ambush quickly rushed and attacked Gibeah; and the men in ambush also deployed and struck the entire city with the edge of the sword. 38Now the appointed signal between the men of Israel and the men in ambush was that they would make a great cloud of smoke rise from the city. 39So the men of Israel turned in the battle, and Benjamin began to strike and kill about thirty men of Israel, for they said, “Certainly they are defeated before us as in the first battle!” 40But when the [signal] cloud began to rise out of the city in a column of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them; and behold, the entire city went up in smoke to heaven. 41When the men of Israel turned back again, the men of Benjamin were terrified, for they saw that disaster had fallen upon them. 42Therefore, they turned their backs before the men of Israel [and fled] toward the direction of the wilderness, but the battle followed and overtook them. As the [fighting men of the] sons of Benjamin ran among them, the Israelites of the cities came out and destroyed them. 43They surrounded [the men of] Benjamin, pursued them relentlessly, and overtook them opposite Gibeah toward the east. 44Thus eighteen thousand men of Benjamin fell, all of these brave and able warriors. 45The survivors [of Benjamin] turned and fled toward the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon, and Israel caught five thousand of them on the roads and overtook them at Gidom and killed two thousand of them. 46So all of Benjamin who fell that day were twenty-five thousand men who drew the sword, all of them brave and able warriors. 47But six hundred men turned and fled toward the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon and stayed at the rock of Rimmon for four months. 48The men of Israel turned back against [the tribe of] the sons of Benjamin and struck them with the edge of the sword, both the entire city [of Gibeah] and the livestock and all that they found. They also set on fire all the [surrounding] towns which they found.

Judges 21
Mourning The Lost Tribe

1Now the men of Israel had sworn [an oath] at Mizpah, “None of us shall give his daughter in marriage to [a man of] Benjamin.” 2So the people came to Bethel and sat there before God until evening, and lifted up their voices and wept bitterly. 3They said, “O LORD, God of Israel, why has this come about in Israel, that there should be today one tribe missing from Israel?” 4And the next day the people got up early and built an altar there and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.

5Then the sons of Israel said, “Which one from all the tribes of Israel did not come up in the assembly to the LORD?” For they had taken a great oath concerning him who did not come up to the LORD at Mizpah, saying, “He shall certainly be put to death.” 6And the sons of Israel felt sorry [and had compassion] for their brother Benjamin and said, “One tribe has been cut off from Israel today. 7“What shall we do for wives for those who are left, since we have sworn [an oath] by the LORD that we will not give them any of our daughters as wives?”

Provision for Their Survival 8And they said, “Which one is there of the tribes from Israel that did not come up to Mizpah to the LORD?” And behold, [it was discovered that] no one had come to the camp from Jabesh-gilead, to the assembly. 9For when the people were assembled, behold, there was not one of the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead there. 10And the congregation sent twelve thousand of the most courageous men there, and commanded them saying, “Go and strike the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead with the sword, including the women and the children. 11“And this is the thing that you shall do; you shall utterly destroy every male and every woman who is not a virgin.” 12And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins who had not known a man intimately; and they brought them to the camp at Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.

13Then the whole congregation sent word to the [surviving] sons of Benjamin who were at the rock of Rimmon, and proclaimed peace to them. 14So [the survivors of] Benjamin returned at that time, and they gave them the women whom they had kept alive from the women of Jabesh-gilead; but there were not enough [to provide wives] for them. 15And the people were sorry [and had compassion] for [the survivors of the tribe of] Benjamin because the LORD had made a gap in the tribes of Israel.

16Then the elders of the congregation said, “What shall we do for wives for those [men] who are left, since the women of Benjamin have been destroyed?” 17They said, “There must be an inheritance for the survivors of Benjamin, so that a tribe will not be wiped out from Israel. 18“But we cannot give them wives from our daughters.” For the sons of Israel had sworn [an oath], “Cursed is he who gives a wife to [a man from the tribe of] Benjamin.”

19So they said, “Listen, there is the yearly feast of the LORD at Shiloh, which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that goes up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the south side of Lebonah.” 20So they instructed the sons of Benjamin, saying, “Go, set an ambush in the vineyards, 21and watch; if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in the dances, then you shall come out of the vineyards and each of you shall catch his wife from the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of [the tribe of] Benjamin. 22“When their fathers or their brothers come to complain to us, we shall say to them, ‘Give them to us voluntarily, because we did not take a wife for each man of Benjamin in battle, nor did you give wives to them, for that would have made you guilty [of breaking your oath].’” 23So the sons of [the tribe of] Benjamin did as instructed and took wives according to their number, from the dancers whom they carried away. Then they went and returned to their inheritance, and rebuilt the towns and lived in them. 24The sons of Israel departed from there at that time, each man to his tribe and family, and each man went from there to his inheritance.

25In those days [when the judges governed] there was no king in Israel; every man did what was right in his own eyes.

Ruth 1
Naomi Widowed

1In the days when the judges governed [Israel], there was a famine in the land [of Canaan]. And a certain man of Bethlehem in Judah went to live temporarily in the country of Moab with his wife and his two sons. 2The man’s name was Elimelech and his wife’s name was Naomi and his two sons were named Mahlon and Chilion. They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in Judah. They went to the country of Moab and stayed there. 3Then Elimelech, Naomi’s husband, died, and she was left [a widow] with her two sons. 4They took wives from the Moabite women; the name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the other was Ruth. They lived there about ten years; 5and then both Mahlon and Chilion also died, so the woman [Naomi] was left without her two sons and her husband.

6Then she set out with her daughters-in-law to return from the country of Moab, for she had heard in Moab how the LORD had taken care of His people [of Judah] in giving them food. 7So she left the place where she was living, her two daughters-in-law with her, and they started on the way back to the land of Judah. 8But Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, “Go back, each of you return to your mother’s house. May the LORD show kindness to you as you have shown kindness to the dead and to me. 9“May the LORD grant that you find rest, each one in the home of her husband.” Then she kissed them [goodbye], and they wept aloud. 10And they said to her, “No, we will go with you to your people [in Judah].” 11But Naomi said, “Go back, my daughters, why should you go with me? Do I still have sons in my womb that may become your husbands? 12Go back, my daughters, go, for I am too old to have a husband. If I said I have hope, and if I actually had a husband tonight and even gave birth to sons, 13would you wait until they were grown? Would you go without marrying? No, my daughters; for it is much more difficult for me than for you, because the LORD’S hand has gone against me.” Ruth’s Loyalty 14Then they wept aloud again; and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law [goodbye], but Ruth clung to her.

15Then Naomi said, “Look, your sister-in-law has gone back to her people and to her gods; turn back and follow your sister-in-law.” 16But Ruth said, “Do not urge me to leave you or to turn back from following you; for where you go, I will go, and where you lodge, I will lodge. Your people will be my people, and your God, my God. 17“Where you die, I will die, and there I will be buried. May the LORD do the same to me [as He has done to you], and more also, if anything but death separates me from you.” 18When Naomi saw that Ruth was determined to go with her, she said nothing more.

19So the two of them went on until they came to Bethlehem. And when they arrived in Bethlehem, the whole city was stirred because of them, and the women asked, “Is this Naomi?” 20She said to them, “Do not call me Naomi (sweetness); call me Mara (bitter), for the Almighty has caused me great grief and bitterness. 21“I left full [with a husband and two sons], but the LORD has brought me back empty. Why call me Naomi, since the LORD has testified against me and the Almighty has afflicted me?”

22So Naomi returned from the country of Moab, and with her Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter-in-law. And they arrived in Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.

Ruth 2
Ruth Gleans In Boaz’ Field

1Now Naomi had a relative of her husband, a man of great wealth and influence, from the family of Elimelech, whose name was Boaz. 2And Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, “Please let me go to the field and glean among the ears of grain after one [of the reapers] in whose sight I may find favor.” Naomi said to her, “Go, my daughter.” 3So Ruth went and picked up the leftover grain in a field after the reapers; and she happened to stop at the plot of land belonging to Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech. 4It was then that Boaz came back from Bethlehem and said to the reapers, “The LORD be with you!” And they answered him, “The LORD bless you!” 5Then Boaz said to his servant who was in charge of the reapers, “Whose young woman is this?” 6The servant in charge of the reapers answered, “She is the young Moabite woman who came back with Naomi from the country of Moab. 7“And she said, ‘Please let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves.’ So she came and has continued [gathering grain] from early morning until now, except when she sat [resting] for a little while in the [field] house.”

8Then Boaz said to Ruth, “Listen carefully, my daughter. Do not go to glean in another field or leave this one, but stay here close by my maids. 9“Watch which field they reap, and follow behind them. I have commanded the servants not to touch you. And when you are thirsty, go to the [water] jars and drink from what the servants draw.” 10Then she kneeled face downward, bowing to the ground, and said to him, “Why have I found favor in your eyes that you should notice me, when I am a foreigner?” 11Boaz answered her, “I have been made fully aware of everything that you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband, and how you have left your father and mother and the land of your birth, and have come to a people that you did not know before. 12“May the LORD repay you for your kindness, and may your reward be full from the LORD, the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to take refuge.” 13Then she said, “Let me find favor in your sight, my lord, for you have comforted me and have spoken kindly to your maidservant, though I am not as one of your maidservants.”

14At mealtime Boaz said to her, “Come over here and eat some bread and dip your bread in the vinegar.” So she sat beside the reapers; and he served her roasted grain, and she ate until she was satisfied and she had some left [for Naomi]. 15When she got up to glean, Boaz ordered his servants, “Let her glean even among the sheaves, and do not insult her. 16“Also you shall purposely pull out for her some stalks [of grain] from the sheaves and leave them so that she may collect them, and do not rebuke her.”

17So she gleaned in the field until evening. Then she beat out what she had gleaned, and it was about an ephah of barley. 18She picked it up and went into the city, and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. Ruth also took out and gave to Naomi what she had saved after she [had eaten and] was satisfied. 19Her mother-in-law said to her, “Where did you glean today? Where did you work? Blessed be the man who took notice of you.” So she told her mother-in-law with whom she had worked and said, “The name of the man with whom I worked today is Boaz.” 20Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, “May he be blessed of the LORD who has not ceased His kindness to the living and to the dead.” Again Naomi said to her, “The man is one of our closest relatives, one who has the right to redeem us.” 21Then Ruth the Moabitess said, “He also said to me, ‘Stay close to my servants until they have harvested my entire crop.’” 22Naomi said to Ruth, “It is good, my daughter, for you to go out [to work] with his maids, so that others do not assault you in another field.” 23So she stayed close to the maids of Boaz, gleaning until the end of the barley and wheat harvests. And she lived with her mother-in-law.

Ruth 3
Boaz Will Redeem Ruth

1Then Naomi her mother-in-law said to Ruth, “My daughter, shall I not look for security and a home for you, so that it may be well with you? 2Now Boaz, with whose maids you were [working], is he not our relative? See now, he is winnowing barley at the threshing floor tonight. 3So wash and anoint yourself [with olive oil], then put on your [best] clothes, and go down to the threshing floor; but stay out of the man’s sight until he has finished eating and drinking. 4“When he lies down, notice the place where he is lying, and go and uncover his feet and lie down. Then he will tell you what to do.” 5Ruth answered her, “I will do everything that you say.”

6So she went down to the threshing floor and did just as her mother-in-law had told her. 7When Boaz had eaten and drunk and his heart was happy, he went to lie down at the end of the stack of grain. Then Ruth came secretly, and uncovered his feet and lay down. 8In the middle of the night the man was startled and he turned over, and found a woman lying at his feet. 9So he said, “Who are you?” And she answered, “I am Ruth your maid. Spread the hem of your garment over me, for you are a close relative and redeemer.” 10Then he said, “May you be blessed by the LORD, my daughter. You have made your last kindness better than the first; for you have not gone after young men, whether poor or rich. 11Now, my daughter, do not be afraid. I will do for you whatever you ask, since all my people in the city know that you are a woman of excellence. 12It is true that I am your close relative and redeemer; however, there is a relative closer [to you] than I. 13“Spend the night [here], and in the morning if he will redeem you, fine; let him do it. But if he does not wish to redeem you, then, as the LORD lives, I will redeem you. Lie down until the morning.”

14So she lay at his feet until the morning, but got up before anyone could recognize another; Boaz said, “Do not let it be known that the woman came to the threshing floor [last night].” 15He also said, “Give me the shawl you are wearing and hold it out.” So Ruth held it and he measured out six measures of barley [into it] and placed it on her. And she went into the city. 16When she came home, her mother-in-law said, “How did it go, my daughter?” And Ruth told her everything that the man had done for her. 17She said, “He gave me these six measures of barley, and he said to me, ‘Do not go back to your mother-in-law empty-handed.’” 18Then Naomi said, “Sit and wait, my daughter, until you learn how this matter turns out; for the man will not rest until he has settled it today.”

Ruth 4
The Marriage Of Ruth

1Then Boaz went up to the city gate [where business and legal matters were settled] and sat down, and then the close relative (redeemer) of whom Boaz had spoken came by. He said to him, “Come over here, friend, and sit down.” So he came and sat down. 2Then Boaz took ten men from the elders of the city and said, “Sit down here.” And they sat down. 3He said to the closest relative (redeemer), “Naomi, who has returned from the country of Moab, must sell the plot of land which belonged to our brother Elimelech. 4“So I thought to let you hear of it, saying, ‘Buy it in the presence of those sitting here, and before the elders of my people. If you will redeem it, redeem it; but if not, then tell me, so that I may know; for there is no one besides you to redeem it, and I am [next of kin] after you.’” And he said, “I will redeem it.” 5Then Boaz said, “The day that you buy the field from Naomi, you must also acquire Ruth the Moabitess, the widow of the deceased, to restore the name of the deceased to his inheritance.” 6The closest relative (redeemer) said, “I cannot redeem it for myself, because [by marrying a Moabitess] I would jeopardize my own inheritance. Take my right of redemption (purchase) yourself, because I cannot redeem it.”

7Now formerly in Israel this was the custom concerning redeeming and exchanging property. To confirm a transaction, a man pulled off his sandal and gave it to the other. This was the way of confirming and attesting in Israel. 8So, when the closest relative (redeemer) said to Boaz, “Buy it for yourself,” he pulled off his sandal [and gave it to Boaz to confirm the agreement]. 9Then Boaz said to the elders and to all the people, “You are witnesses this day that I have bought everything that was Elimelech’s and everything that was Chilion’s and Mahlon’s from the hand of Naomi. 10“I have also acquired Ruth the Moabitess, the widow of Mahlon, to be my wife to restore the name of the deceased to his inheritance, so that the name of the deceased will not be cut off from his brothers or from the gate of his birthplace. You are witnesses today.” 11All the people at the gate and the elders said, “We are witnesses. May the LORD make the woman who is coming into your house like Rachel and Leah, the two who built the household of Israel. May you achieve wealth and power in Ephrathah and become famous in Bethlehem. 12“Further, may your house be like the house of Perez whom Tamar bore to Judah, because of the offspring which the LORD will give you by this young woman.”

13So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his wife. And he went in to her, and the LORD enabled her to conceive, and she gave birth to a son. 14Then the women said to Naomi, “Blessed is the LORD who has not left you without a redeemer (grandson, as heir) today, and may his name become famous in Israel. 15“May he also be to you one who restores life and sustains your old age; for your daughter-in-law, who loves you and is better to you than seven sons, has given birth to him.” The Line of David Began Here 16Then Naomi took the child and placed him in her lap, and she became his nurse. 17The neighbor women gave him a name, saying, “A son (grandson) has been born to Naomi.” They named him Obed (worshiper). He is the father of Jesse, the father of David [the ancestor of Jesus Christ].

18Now these are the descendants of Perez: Perez was the father of Hezron, 19Hezron was the father of Ram, Ram the father of Amminadab, 20Amminadab the father of Nahshon, Nahshon the father of Salmon, 21Salmon the father of Boaz, Boaz the father of Obed, 22Obed the father of Jesse, and Jesse the father of David [the king of Israel and the ancestor of Jesus Christ].

1 Samuel 1
Elkanah And His Wives

1There was a certain man of Ramathaim-zophim, of the hill country of Ephraim, named Elkanah the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite. 2He had two wives, one named Hannah and the other named Peninnah. Peninnah had children, but Hannah had none.

3This man went up from his city each year to worship and sacrifice to the LORD of hosts at Shiloh. Hophni and Phinehas, the two sons of Eli, were priests to the LORD there. 4When the day came that Elkanah sacrificed, he would give portions [of the sacrificial meat] to Peninnah his wife and all her sons and daughters. 5But to Hannah he would give a double portion, because he loved Hannah, but the LORD had given her no children. 6Hannah’s rival provoked her bitterly, to irritate and embarrass her, because the LORD had left her childless. 7So it happened year after year, whenever she went up to the house of the LORD, Peninnah provoked her; so she wept and would not eat. 8Then Elkanah her husband said to her, “Hannah, why do you cry and why do you not eat? Why are you so sad and discontent? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”

9So Hannah got up after eating and drinking in Shiloh. Now Eli the priest was sitting on his seat beside the doorpost of the temple (tabernacle) of the LORD. 10Hannah was greatly distressed, and she prayed to the LORD and wept in anguish. 11She made a vow, saying, “O LORD of hosts, if You will indeed look on the affliction (suffering) of Your maidservant and remember, and not forget Your maidservant, but will give Your maidservant a son, then I will give him to the LORD all the days of his life; a razor shall never touch his head.”

12Now it happened as she continued praying before the LORD, that Eli was watching her mouth. 13Hannah was speaking in her heart (mind); only her lips were moving, and her voice was not heard, so Eli thought she was drunk. 14Eli said to her, “How long will you make yourself drunk? Get rid of your wine.” 15But Hannah answered, “No, my lord, I am a woman with a despairing spirit. I have not been drinking wine or any intoxicating drink, but I have poured out my soul before the LORD. 16“Do not regard your maidservant as a wicked and worthless woman, for I have spoken until now out of my great concern and [bitter] provocation.” 17Then Eli answered and said, “Go in peace; and may the God of Israel grant your petition that you have asked of Him.” 18Hannah said, “Let your maidservant find grace and favor in your sight.” So the woman went on her way and ate, and her face was no longer sad.

Samuel Is Born to Hannah 19The family got up early the next morning, worshiped before the LORD, and returned to their home in Ramah. Elkanah knew Hannah his wife, and the LORD remembered her [prayer]. 20It came about in due time, after Hannah had conceived, that she gave birth to a son; she named him Samuel, saying, “Because I have asked for him from the LORD.”

21Then the man Elkanah and all his household went up to offer to the LORD the yearly sacrifice and pay his vow. 22But Hannah did not go up, for she said to her husband, “I will not go up until the child is weaned; and then I will bring him, so that he may appear before the LORD and remain there as long as he lives.” 23Elkanah her husband said to her, “Do what seems best to you. Wait until you have weaned him; only may the LORD establish and confirm His word.” So the woman remained [behind] and nursed her son until she weaned him. 24Now when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, along with a three-year-old bull, an ephah of flour, and a leather bottle of wine [to pour over the burnt offering for a sweet fragrance], and she brought Samuel to the LORD’S house in Shiloh, although the child was young. 25Then they slaughtered the bull, and brought the child to Eli. 26Hannah said, “Oh, my lord! As [surely as] your soul lives, my lord, I am the woman who stood beside you here, praying to the LORD. 27For this child I prayed, and the LORD has granted me my request which I asked of Him. 28“Therefore I have also dedicated him to the LORD; as long as he lives he is dedicated to the LORD.” And they worshiped the LORD there.

1 Samuel 2
Hannah’s Song Of Thanksgiving

1Hannah prayed and said,
“My heart rejoices and triumphs in the LORD;
My horn (strength) is lifted up in the LORD,
My mouth has opened wide [to speak boldly] against my enemies,
Because I rejoice in Your salvation.
2“There is no one holy like the LORD,
There is no one besides You,
There is no Rock like our God.
3“Do not go on boasting so very proudly,
Do not let arrogance come out of your mouth;
For the LORD is a God of knowledge,
And by Him actions are weighed (examined).
4“The bows of the mighty are broken,
But those who have stumbled equip themselves with strength.
5“Those who were full hire themselves out for bread,
But those who were hungry cease [to hunger].
Even the barren [woman] gives birth to seven,
But she who has many children withers away.
6“The LORD puts to death and makes alive;
He brings down to Sheol (the grave) and raises up [from the grave].
7“The LORD makes poor and makes rich;
He brings low and He lifts up.
8“He raises up the poor from the dust,
He lifts up the needy from the ash heap
To make them sit with nobles,
And inherit a seat of honor and glory;
For the pillars of the earth are the LORD’S,
And He set the land on them.
9“He guards the feet of His godly (faithful) ones,
But the wicked ones are silenced and perish in darkness;
For a man shall not prevail by might.
10“The adversaries of the LORD will be broken to pieces;
He will thunder against them in the heavens,
The LORD will judge the ends of the earth;
And He will give strength to His king,
And will exalt the horn (strength) of His anointed.”

11Elkanah [and his wife Hannah] returned to Ramah to his house. But the child [Samuel] served the LORD under the guidance of Eli the priest.

The Sin of Eli’s Sons 12The sons of Eli [Hophni and Phinehas] were worthless (dishonorable, unprincipled) men; they did not know [nor respect] the LORD 13and the custom of the priests with [the sacrifices of] the people. When any man was offering a sacrifice, the priest’s servant would come while the meat was boiling, with a three-pronged [meat] fork in his hand; 14then he would thrust it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; everything that the fork brought up the priest would take for himself. This is what they did in Shiloh to all [the sacrifices of] the Israelites who came there. 15Also, before they burned (offered) the fat, the priest’s servant would come and say to the man who was sacrificing, “Give the priest meat to roast, since he will not accept boiled meat from you, only raw.” 16If the man said to him, “Certainly they are to burn (offer) the fat first, and then you may take as much as you want,” then the priest’s servant would say, “No! You shall give it to me now or I will take it by force.” 17So the sin of the [two] young men [Hophni and Phinehas] was very great before the LORD, for the men treated the offering of the LORD disrespectfully.

Samuel before the LORD as a Boy 18Now Samuel was ministering before the LORD, as a child dressed in a linen ephod [a sacred item of priestly clothing]. 19Moreover, his mother would make him a little robe and would bring it up to him each year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice. 20Then Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife and say, “May the LORD give you children by this woman in place of the one she asked for which was dedicated to the LORD.” Then they would return to their own home.

21And [the time came when] the LORD visited Hannah, so that she conceived and gave birth to three sons and two daughters. And the boy Samuel grew before the LORD.

Eli Rebukes His Sons 22Now Eli was very old; and he heard about everything that his sons were doing to all [the people of] Israel, and how they were lying with the women who served at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting (tabernacle). 23Eli said to them, “Why do you do such things, the evil things that I hear from all these people? 24No, my sons; for the report that I keep hearing from the passers-by among the LORD’S people is not good. 25“If one man does wrong and sins against another, God will intercede (arbitrate) for him; but if a man does wrong to the LORD, who can intercede for him?” But they would not listen to their father, for it was the LORD’S will to put them to death.

26But the boy Samuel continued to grow in stature and in favor both with the LORD and with men.

27Then a man of God (prophet) came to Eli and said to him, “Thus says the LORD: ‘Did I not plainly reveal Myself to the house of your father (ancestor) when they were in Egypt in bondage to Pharaoh’s house? 28‘Moreover, I selected him out of all the tribes of Israel to be My priest, to go up to My altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before Me. And [from then on] I gave to the house of your father all the fire offerings of the sons of Israel. 29‘Why then do you kick at (despise) My sacrifice and My offering which I commanded in My dwelling place, and honor your sons more than Me, by fattening yourselves with the choicest part of every offering of My people Israel?’ 30Therefore the LORD God of Israel declares, ‘I did indeed say that your house and that of [Aaron] your father would walk [in priestly service] before Me forever.’ But now the LORD declares, ‘Far be it from Me—for those who honor Me I will honor, and those who despise Me will be insignificant and contemptible. 31‘Behold, the time is coming when I will cut off your strength and the strength of your father’s house, so that there will not be an old man in your house. 32‘You will look at the distress of My house (the tabernacle), in spite of all the good which God will do for Israel, and there will never again be an old man in your house. 33‘Yet I will not cut off every man of yours from My altar; your eyes will fail from weeping and your soul will grieve, and all those born in your house will die as men [in the prime of life]. 34‘This will be the sign to you which shall come concerning your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas: on the same day both of them shall die. 35‘But I will raise up for Myself a faithful priest who will do according to what is in My heart and in My soul; and I will build him a permanent and enduring house, and he will walk before My anointed forever. 36‘And it will happen that everyone who is left in your house will come and bow down to him for a piece of silver and a loaf of bread and say, “Please assign me to one of the priest’s offices so I may eat a piece of bread.”’”

1 Samuel 3
The Prophetic Call To Samuel

1Now the boy Samuel was attending to the service of the LORD under the supervision of Eli. The word of the LORD was rare and precious in those days; visions [that is, new revelations of divine truth] were not widespread.

2Yet it happened at that time, as Eli was lying down in his own place (now his eyesight had begun to grow dim and he could not see well). 3and the [oil] lamp of God had not yet gone out, and Samuel was lying down in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was, 4that the LORD called Samuel, and he answered, “Here I am.” 5He ran to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But Eli said, “I did not call you; lie down again.” So he went and lay down. 6Then the LORD called yet again, “Samuel!” So Samuel got up and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But Eli answered, “I did not call, my son; lie down again.” 7Now Samuel did not yet know [or personally experience] the LORD, and the word of the LORD was not yet revealed [directly] to him. 8So the LORD called Samuel a third time. And he stood and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you did call me.” Then Eli understood that it was the LORD [who was] calling the boy. 9So Eli said to Samuel, “Go, lie down, and it shall be that if He calls you, you shall say, ‘Speak, LORD, for Your servant is listening.’” So Samuel went and lay down in his place.

10Then the LORD came and stood and called as at the previous times, “Samuel! Samuel!” Then Samuel answered, “Speak, for Your servant is listening.” 11The LORD said to Samuel, “Behold, I am about to do a thing in Israel at which both ears of everyone who hears it will ring. 12On that day I will carry out against Eli everything that I have spoken concerning his house (family), from beginning to end. 13Now I have told him that I am about to judge his house forever for the sinful behavior which he knew [was happening], because his sons were bringing a curse on themselves [dishonoring and blaspheming God] and he did not rebuke them. 14“Therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli that the sinful behavior of Eli’s house (family) shall not be atoned for by sacrifice or offering forever.”

15So Samuel lay down until morning. Then he opened the doors of the LORD’S house. But Samuel was afraid to tell the vision to Eli. 16But Eli called Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son.” And he answered, “Here I am.” 17Then Eli said, “What is it that He said to you? Please do not hide it from me. May God do the same to you, and more also, if you hide from me anything of all that He said to you.” 18So Samuel told him everything, hiding nothing from him. And Eli said, “It is the LORD; may He do what seems good to Him.”

19Now Samuel grew; and the LORD was with him and He let none of his words fail [to be fulfilled]. 20And all Israel from Dan [in the north] to Beersheba [in the south] knew that Samuel was appointed as a prophet of the LORD. 21And the LORD continued to appear in Shiloh, for the LORD revealed Himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD.

1 Samuel 4
Philistines Take The Ark In Victory

1And the word of [the LORD through] Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out to meet the Philistines in battle and they camped beside Ebenezer while the Philistines camped at Aphek. 2The Philistines assembled in battle formation to meet Israel, and when the battle was over, Israel was defeated by the Philistines, who killed about four thousand men on the battlefield. 3When the people (soldiers) came into the camp, the elders of Israel said, “Why has the LORD defeated us today before the Philistines? Let us bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD here from Shiloh, so that He may come among us and save us from the hand of our enemies.” 4So the people sent word to Shiloh, and from there they carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts who sits above the cherubim; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were with the ark of the covenant of God.

5So it happened that as the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp, all [the people of] Israel shouted with a great shout, and the earth resounded. 6When the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, “What does the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews mean?” Then they understood that the ark of the LORD had come into the camp. 7The Philistines were afraid, for they said, “God has come into the camp.” And they said, “Woe [disaster is coming] to us! For nothing like this has happened before. 8Woe to us! Who will rescue us from the hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods who struck the Egyptians with all kinds of plagues in the wilderness. 9“Take courage, and be men, O Philistines, so that you do not become servants to the Hebrews, as they have been servants to you; act like men and fight!”

10So the Philistines fought; Israel was defeated and every man fled to his tent. It was a very great defeat, for thirty thousand foot soldiers of Israel fell. 11Also the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were killed.

12Now a man [from the tribe] of Benjamin ran from the battle line and came to Shiloh that same day with his clothes torn and dust on his head [as signs of mourning over the disaster]. 13When he arrived, Eli was sitting on his seat by the road, keeping watch, because his heart was anxious about the ark of God. When the man arrived to report [the news] in the city, everyone in the city cried out [to God, for help]. 14When Eli heard the noise of the outcry, he asked, “What is the noise of this uproar?” And the man came hurriedly and told Eli. 15Now Eli was ninety-eight years old; his eyes were dim so that he could not see. 16The man said to Eli, “I have come from the battle line. Indeed, I escaped from the battle line today.” Eli said, “How did things go, my son?” 17The messenger replied, “Israel has fled before the Philistines and there has also been a great slaughter among the people. Also your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God has been taken.” 18When he mentioned the ark of God, Eli fell off the seat backwards by the side of the [city] gate. His neck was broken and he died, for he was old and heavy. He had judged Israel for forty years.

19Now his daughter-in-law, Phinehas’ wife, was pregnant, and was about to give birth; so when she heard the news that the ark of God had been taken and that her father-in-law and her husband had died, she kneeled down and gave birth, because her [labor] pains began. 20And about the time of her death [following the sudden birth] the women attending her said to her, “Do not be afraid, for you have given birth to a son.” But she did not answer or pay any attention. 21And she named the boy Ichabod, saying, “The glory has left Israel,” because the ark of God had been taken and because of [the deaths of] her father-in-law and her husband. 22She said, “The glory has left Israel, for the ark of God has been taken.”

1 Samuel 5
Capture Of The Ark Provokes God

1Then the Philistines took the ark of God, and they brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod. 2They took the ark of God and brought it into the house of Dagon and set it beside [the image of] Dagon [their chief idol]. 3When the people of Ashdod got up early the next day, behold, Dagon had fallen on his face on the ground before the ark of the LORD. So they took Dagon and returned him to his place. 4But when they got up early the next morning, behold, Dagon had [again] fallen on his face on the ground before the ark of the LORD, and his head and both palms of his hands were [lying] cut off on the threshold; only the trunk [portion] of [the idol of] Dagon was left on him. 5This is the reason neither the priests of Dagon nor any who enter Dagon’s house step on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod to this day.

6Then the hand of the LORD was heavy on the people of Ashdod, and He caused them to be dumbfounded and struck them with tumors, both Ashdod and its territory. 7When the men of Ashdod saw what had happened, they said, “The ark of the God of Israel must not remain with us, for His hand is heavy on us and on Dagon our god.” 8So they sent word and gathered all the lords (governors) of the Philistines to them and said, “What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel?” They answered, “Let the ark of the God of Israel be brought around to Gath.” So they took the ark of the God of Israel there. 9But it happened that after they had taken it to Gath, the hand of the LORD was against the city, causing an extremely great panic [because of the deaths from the plague], for He struck the people of the city, both young and old, and tumors broke out on them. 10So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And as the ark of God came to Ekron, the Ekronites cried out, “They have brought the ark of the God of Israel [from Gath] to us, to kill us and our people.” 11So they sent word and gathered all the lords of the Philistines and said, “Send away the ark of the God of Israel; let it be returned to its own place, so that it will not kill us and our people.” For there was a deadly panic throughout the city; the hand of God was very heavy (severe) there. 12The men who had not died were stricken with tumors and the cry of the city [for help] went up to heaven.

1 Samuel 6
The Ark Returned To Israel

1Now the ark of the LORD had been in the country of the Philistines for seven months. 2And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners (seers), saying, “What shall we do with the ark of the LORD? Let us know how we can send it back to its place.” 3They said, “If you send away the ark of the God of Israel, do not send it empty [without a gift]; but be sure to return [it] to Him [together with] a guilt offering. Then you will be healed, and it will be known to you why His hand is not removed from you.” 4Then they said, “What shall the guilt offering be which we shall return to Him?” They answered, “Five golden tumors and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords (governors) of the Philistines, for one plague was on all of you and on your lords. 5So you shall make replicas of your tumors and of your mice that ravage the land, and give glory to the God of Israel; perhaps He will lighten His hand [of judgment] on you and your gods and your land. 6Why then do you harden your hearts [allowing pride to cause your downfall] just as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? When He had severely dealt with them and mocked them, did they not allow the people [of Israel] to go, and they departed? 7Now then, make a new cart and prepare two milk cows on which a yoke has never been placed; and hitch the cows to the cart and take their calves back home, away from them. 8Then take the ark of the LORD and put it on the cart; and put the articles of gold which you are returning to Him as a guilt offering in a box beside it. Then send it away [without a driver]. 9“But watch, if it goes up by the way of its own territory to Beth-shemesh, then [you will know that] He has done us this great evil. But if not, then we will know that it was not His hand that struck us; this disaster happened to us by chance.”

10And the men did so, and took two milk cows and hitched them to the cart, and corralled their calves at home. 11They put the ark of the LORD on the cart, and the box containing the golden mice and the replicas of their tumors. 12And the cows went straight toward Beth-shemesh along the highway, lowing as they went, and did not turn away to the right or the left. And the Philistine lords (governors) followed them to the border of Beth-shemesh.

13Now the men of Beth-shemesh were gathering their wheat harvest in the valley, and they looked up and saw the ark and rejoiced to see it. 14The cart came into the field of Joshua of Beth-shemesh and stopped there. A large stone was there; and the men split up the wood of the cart [for firewood] and offered the cows as a burnt offering to the LORD. 15The Levites had taken down the ark of the LORD and the box beside it, in which were the articles of gold, and put them on the large stone. And the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and made sacrifices that day to the LORD. 16When the five lords of the Philistines saw what happened, they returned to Ekron that day.

17These are the golden tumors which the Philistines returned as a guilt offering to the LORD: one for Ashdod, one for Gaza, one for Ashkelon, one for Gath and one for Ekron [the five chief cities of the Philistines]; 18also the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both fortified cities and [unwalled] country villages. The large stone on which the Levites set the ark of the LORD remains a witness to this day in the field of Joshua of Beth-shemesh.

19The LORD struck down some of the men of Beth-shemesh because they had looked into the ark of the LORD. He struck down 50,070 men among the people, and the people mourned because the LORD had struck the people with a great slaughter. 20The men of Beth-shemesh said, “Who is able to stand before the LORD, this holy God? And to whom shall He go up from us?” 21So they sent messengers to the residents of Kiriath-jearim, saying, “The Philistines have returned the ark of the LORD. Come down and take it up to you.”

1 Samuel 7
Rescue From The Philistines

1So the men of Kiriath-jearim came and took up the ark of the Lord and brought it into the house of Abinadab on the hill, and they consecrated Eleazar his son to care for the ark of the Lord. 2And from that day the ark remained in Kiriath-jearim for a very long time, for it was twenty years [until the reign of King David]; and all the house of Israel lamented (wailed) and grieved after the LORD.

3Then Samuel said to all the house of Israel, “If you are returning to the LORD with all your heart, remove the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth (pagan goddesses) from among you and direct your hearts to the LORD and serve Him only; and He will rescue you from the hand of the Philistines.” 4So the Israelites removed the Baals and the Ashtaroth and served the LORD alone.

5Samuel said, “Gather all Israel together at Mizpah and I will pray to the LORD for you.” 6So they gathered at Mizpah, and drew water and poured it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day and said there, “We have sinned against the LORD.” And Samuel judged the Israelites at Mizpah.

7Now when the Philistines heard that the Israelites had gathered at Mizpah, the lords (governors) of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the Israelites heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines. 8And the sons of Israel said to Samuel, “Do not cease to cry out to the LORD our God for us, so that He may save us from the hand of the Philistines.” 9So Samuel took a nursing lamb and offered it as a whole burnt offering to the LORD; and Samuel cried out to the LORD for Israel and the LORD answered him. 10As Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines approached for the battle against Israel. Then the LORD thundered with a great voice that day against the Philistines and threw them into confusion, and they were defeated and fled before Israel. 11And the men of Israel came out of Mizpah and pursued the Philistines, and struck them down as far as [the territory] below Beth-car.

12Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizpah and Shen, and he named it Ebenezer (stone of help), saying, “Thus far the LORD has helped us.” 13So the Philistines were subdued and they did not come anymore into Israelite territory. And the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel. 14The cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron to Gath; and Israel recovered the cities’ territory from the Philistines. Also there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.

Samuel’s Ministry 15Now Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. 16He used to go annually on a circuit to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpah, and he judged Israel in all these places. 17Then he would return to Ramah, because his home was there; and there he judged Israel, and there he built an altar to the LORD.

1 Samuel 8
Israel Demands A King

1And it came about when Samuel was old that he appointed his sons as judges over Israel. 2Now the name of his firstborn was Joel, and the name of his second, Abijah; they were judging in Beersheba. 3His sons, however, did not walk in his ways, but turned aside after dishonest gain, took bribes, and perverted justice.

4Then all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Ramah 5and said to him, “Look, you have grown old, and your sons do not walk in your ways. Now appoint us a king to judge us [and rule over us] like all the other nations.” 6But their demand displeased Samuel when they said, “Give us a king to judge and rule over us.” So Samuel prayed to the LORD. 7The LORD said to Samuel, “Listen to the voice of the people in regard to all that they say to you, for they have not rejected you, but they have rejected Me from being King over them. 8Like all the deeds which they have done since the day that I brought them up from Egypt even to this day—in that they have abandoned (rejected) Me and served other gods—so they are doing to you also. 9“So now listen to their voice; only solemnly warn them and tell them the ways of the king who will reign over them.”

Warning concerning a King 10So Samuel told all the words of the LORD to the people who were asking him for a king. 11He said, “These will be the ways of the king who will reign over you: he will take your sons and appoint them for himself to his chariots and among his horsemen and they will run before his chariots. 12He will appoint them for himself to be commanders over thousands and over fifties, and some to do his plowing and to reap his harvest and to make his implements of war and equipment for his chariots. 13He will take your daughters to be perfumers, cooks, and bakers. 14He will take the best of your fields, your vineyards, and your olive groves, and give them to his servants. 15He will take a tenth of your grain and of your vineyards and give it to his officers and to his servants. 16He will take your male servants and your female servants and your best young men and your donkeys and use them for his work. 17He will take a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves shall be his servants. 18“Then you will cry out on that day because of your king whom you have chosen for yourselves, but the LORD will not answer you on that day [because you have rejected Him as King].”

19Nevertheless, the people refused to listen to the voice of Samuel, and they said, “No, but there shall be a king over us, 20so that we too may be like all the nations [around us], that our king may judge [and govern] us and go out before us and fight our battles.” 21Samuel had heard all the words of the people and repeated them to the LORD. 22And the LORD said to Samuel, “Listen to their request and appoint a king for them.” So Samuel said to the men of Israel, “Go, each man to his own city.”

1 Samuel 9
Saul’s Search

1There was a man of [the tribe of] Benjamin whose name was Kish the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of influence and wealth. 2Kish had a son named Saul, a choice and handsome man; among the sons of Israel there was not a man more handsome than he. From his shoulders and up he was [a head] taller than any of the people.

3Now the donkeys of Kish, Saul’s father, had wandered off and were lost. Kish said to his son Saul, “Please take one of the servants with you and arise, go look for the donkeys.” 4And they passed through the hill country of Ephraim and the land of Shalishah, but did not find them. Then they passed through the land of Shaalim, but they were not there and the land of the Benjamites, but they [still] did not find them.

5When they came to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant who was with him, “Come, let us return, otherwise my father will stop worrying about the donkeys and become anxious about us.” 6The servant said to him, “Look here, in this city there is a man of God, and the man is held in honor; everything that he says comes true. Now let us go there; perhaps he can advise us about our journey [and tell us where we should go].” 7Then Saul said to his servant, “But look, if we go [to see him], what shall we bring to the man? For the bread from our sacks is gone and there is no gift to bring to the man of God. What do we have [to offer]?” 8The servant replied again to Saul, “Here in my hand I have a quarter of a shekel of silver; I will give that to the man of God, and he will advise us as to [where we should go on] our journey [to find the donkeys].” 9(Formerly in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God, he would say, “Come, let us go to the seer”; for he who is called a prophet today was formerly called a seer.) 10Saul said to his servant, “Well said; come, let us go.” So they went to the city where the man of God was living.

11As they went up the hill to the city, they met some young women going out to draw water, and said to them, “Is the seer (prophet) here?” 12They answered them, “He is; look, he is ahead of you. Hurry now, for he has come into the city today because the people have a sacrifice on the high place today. 13“As you enter the city you will find him before he goes up to the high place to eat, for the people will not eat until he comes, because he must ask the blessing on the sacrifice; afterward, those who are invited will eat. So go up now, for about now you will find him.” 14So they went up to the city. And as they came into the city, there was Samuel coming out toward them to go up to the high place.

God’s Choice for King 15Now a day before Saul came, the LORD had informed Samuel [of this], saying, 16“About this time tomorrow I will send you a man from the land of Benjamin, and you shall anoint him as leader over My people Israel; and he will save My people from the hand of the Philistines. For I have looked upon [the distress of] My people, because their cry [for help] has come to Me.” 17When Samuel saw Saul, the LORD said to him, “There is the man of whom I spoke to you. This one shall rule over My people [as their king].” 18Then Saul approached Samuel in the [city] gate and said, “Please tell me where the seer’s house is.” 19Samuel answered Saul, “I am the seer. Go on ahead of me to the high place, for you shall eat with me today; and in the morning I will let you go, and will tell you all that is on your mind. 20“As for your donkeys which were lost three days ago, do not be concerned about them, for they have been found. And for whom are all things that are desirable in Israel? Are they not for you and for all your father’s household (family)?” 21Saul replied, “Am I not a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? And is not my family the smallest of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? Why then have you spoken this way to me [as if I were very important]?”

22Then Samuel took Saul and his servant and brought them into the hall [at the high place] and gave them a place [to sit] at the head of the persons—about thirty men—who were invited [while the rest ate outside]. 23Samuel said to the cook, “Bring the [priests’] portion that I gave you, regarding which I told you, ‘Set it aside.’” 24Then the cook lifted up the leg (thigh) with the meat that was on it [indicating that it was the priest’s honored portion] and placed it before Saul. Samuel said, “Here is what has been reserved [for you]. Set it before you and eat, because it has been kept for you until the appointed time, ever since I invited the people.” So Saul ate with Samuel that day.

25When they came down from the high place into the city, Samuel spoke with Saul on the roof [of his house]. 26They got up early [the next day]; and at dawn Samuel called Saul [who was sleeping] on the roof, saying, “Get up, so that I may send you on your way.” Saul got up, and both he and Samuel went outside. 27As they were going down to the outskirts of the city, Samuel said to Saul, “Tell the servant to go on ahead of us so that he may pass by but you stand still now so that I may proclaim the word of God to you.”

1 Samuel 10
Saul Among Prophets

1Then Samuel took the flask of oil and poured it on Saul’s head, kissed him, and said, “Has the LORD not anointed you as ruler over His inheritance (Israel)? 2“When you leave me today, you will meet two men beside Rachel’s tomb in the territory of Benjamin at Zelzah; they will say to you, ‘The donkeys you went to look for have been found. And your father has stopped caring about them and is worried about you, saying, “What shall I do about my son?”’ 3Then you will go on further from there, and you will come to the terebinth tree of Tabor, and three men going up to [sacrifice to] God at Bethel will meet you there, one carrying three young goats, another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a jug of wine. 4They will greet you and give you two loaves of bread, which you will accept from their hand. 5After that you will come to the hill of God where the garrison of the Philistines is; and when you come there to the city, you will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place [of worship] with harp, tambourine, flute, and lyre before them, and they will be prophesying. 6Then the Spirit of the LORD will come upon you mightily, and you will prophesy with them, and you will be changed into another man. 7When these signs come to you, do for yourself whatever the situation requires, for God is with you. 8“You shall go down ahead of me to Gilgal; and behold, I will be coming down to you to offer burnt offerings and to sacrifice peace offerings. You shall wait seven days until I come to you and show you what you must do.”

9Then it happened when Saul turned his back to leave Samuel, God changed his heart; and all those signs came to pass that day. 10When they came to the hill [Gibeah], behold, a group of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came on him mightily, and he prophesied [under divine guidance] among them. 11Now when all who knew Saul previously saw that he actually prophesied now [by inspiration] with the prophets, the people said one to another, “What has happened to [Saul, who is nobody but] the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?” 12And a man from there answered, “But who is the father of the others?” So it became a proverb, “Is Saul also among the prophets?” 13When Saul had finished prophesying, he went to the high place [of worship].

14Saul’s uncle said to him and to his servant, “Where did you go?” And Saul said, “To look for the donkeys. And when we saw that they were nowhere to be found, we went to Samuel [for help].” 15Saul’s uncle said, “Please tell me, what did Samuel say to you?” 16And Saul said to his uncle, “He told us plainly that the donkeys had been found.” But he did not tell him about the matter of the kingdom which Samuel had mentioned.

Saul Publicly Chosen King 17Then Samuel called the people together to the LORD at Mizpah, 18and he said to Israel, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, ‘It was I who brought Israel up from Egypt, and I rescued you from the hand of the Egyptians and from all the kingdoms that were oppressing you.’ 19“But today you have rejected your God, who Himself saves you from all your disasters and distresses; yet you have said, ‘No! Set a king over us.’ Now then, present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes and by your families (clans).”

20And when Samuel brought all the tribes of Israel near, the tribe of Benjamin was chosen by lot. 21Then he brought the tribe of Benjamin near by their families, and the family of Matri was chosen by lot. And Saul the son of Kish was chosen by lot; but when they looked for him, he could not be found. 22So they inquired further of the LORD, “Has the man come here yet?” And the LORD answered, “He is there, hiding himself by the provisions and supplies.” 23So they ran and took him from there, and when he stood among the people, he was taller than any of the people from his shoulders upward. 24Samuel said to all the people, “Do you see him whom the LORD has chosen? For there is no one like him among all the people.” So all the people shouted and said, “Long live the king!”

25Then Samuel told the people the requirements of the kingdom, and wrote them in a book and placed it before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the people away, each one to his home. 26Saul also went home to Gibeah; and the brave men whose hearts God had touched went with him. 27But some worthless men said, “How can this man save and rescue us?” And they regarded Saul with contempt and did not bring him a gift. But he ignored the insult and kept silent.

1 Samuel 11
Saul Defeats The Ammonites

1Now Nahash the Ammonite [king] went up and besieged Jabesh-gilead; and all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, “Make a treaty [of peace] with us and we will serve you.” 2But Nahash the Ammonite told them, “I will make a treaty with you on this condition, that I will gouge out the right eye of every one of you, and make it a disgrace upon all Israel.” 3The elders of Jabesh said to Nahash, “Give us seven days so that we may send messengers throughout the territory of Israel. Then, if there is no one to save us, we will come out [and surrender] to you.” 4Then the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul and told the news to the people; and all the people raised their voices and wept aloud.

5Now Saul was coming out of the field behind the oxen, and he said, “What is the matter with the people that they are weeping?” So they told him about the report of the men of Jabesh. 6The Spirit of God came upon Saul mightily when he heard these words, and he became extremely angry. 7He took a team of oxen and cut them in pieces, and sent them throughout the territory of Israel by the hand of messengers, saying, “Whoever does not come out to follow Saul and Samuel, the same shall be done to his oxen.” Then fear of the LORD fell on the people, and they came out [united] as one man [with one purpose]. 8He assembled and counted them at Bezek; and the sons of Israel numbered 300,000, and the men of Judah 30,000. 9They said to the messengers who had come, “You shall say to the men of Jabesh-gilead: ‘Tomorrow, by the time the sun is hot, you will have help [against the Ammonites].’” So the messengers came and reported this to the men of Jabesh; and they were overjoyed. 10So the men of Jabesh said [to Nahash the Ammonite], “Tomorrow we will come out to you [to surrender], and you may do to us whatever seems good to you.” 11The next morning Saul put the men into three companies; and they entered the [Ammonites’] camp during the [darkness of the early] morning watch and killed the Ammonites until the heat of the day; and the survivors were scattered, and no two of them were left together.

12The people said to Samuel, “Who is the one who said, ‘Shall Saul reign over us?’ Bring the men, and we will put them to death.” 13But Saul said, “No man shall be put to death this day, for today the LORD has brought victory to Israel.”

14Samuel said to the people, “Come, let us go to Gilgal and there restore the kingdom.” 15So all the people went to Gilgal, and there they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal. There they also sacrificed peace offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.

1 Samuel 12
Samuel Addresses Israel

1Then Samuel said to all Israel, “Behold, I have listened to your voice in everything that you have said to me and have appointed a king over you. 2And now, here is the king walking before you. As for me, I am old and gray, and here are my sons with you. I have walked before you from my childhood to this day. 3“Here I am; testify against me before the LORD and [Saul] His anointed [if I have done someone wrong]. Whose ox have I taken, or whose donkey have I taken, or whom have I exploited? Whom have I oppressed or from whose hand have I taken a bribe to blind my eyes [to the truth]? [Tell me and] I will restore it to you.” 4They said, “You have not exploited us or oppressed us or taken anything at all from a man’s hand.” 5Samuel said to them, “The LORD is a witness against you, and [Saul] His anointed is a witness this day that you have not found anything in my hand.” And they answered, “He is a witness.”

6Then Samuel said to the people, “It is the LORD who appointed Moses and Aaron and brought your fathers (ancestors) up from the land of Egypt. 7Now then, take your stand, so that I may plead and contend with you before the LORD concerning all the righteous acts of the LORD which He did for you and for your fathers. 8When Jacob [and his sons] had come into Egypt [and later when the Egyptians oppressed them] and your fathers cried out to the LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron who brought your fathers out of Egypt and settled them in this place. 9But when they forgot the LORD their God, He sold them into the hand of Sisera, commander of Hazor’s army, and into the hand of the Philistines and of the king of Moab, and they fought against them. 10They cried out to the LORD, saying, ‘We have sinned because we have abandoned (rejected) the Lord and have served the Baals and the Ashtaroth; but now rescue us from the hands of our enemies, and we will serve You.’ 11Then the LORD sent Jerubbaal (Gideon) and Bedan and Jephthah and Samuel, and He rescued you from the hand of your enemies on every side, and you lived in security. The King Confirmed 12But when you saw that Nahash king of the Ammonites had come against you, you said to me, ‘No, but a king shall reign over us’—although the LORD your God was your King. 13Now therefore, here is [Saul] the king whom you have chosen, and for whom you asked; behold, the LORD has set a king over you. 14If you will fear the LORD [with awe and profound reverence] and serve Him and listen to His voice and not rebel against His commandment, then both you and your king will follow the LORD your God [and it will be well]. 15But if you do not listen to the LORD’S voice, but rebel against His command, then the hand of the LORD will be against you [to punish you], as it was against your fathers. 16So now, take your stand and see this great thing which the LORD will do before your eyes. 17“Is it not [the beginning of the] wheat harvest today? I will call to the LORD and He will send thunder and rain; then you will know [without any doubt], and see that your evil which you have done is great in the sight of the LORD by asking for yourselves a king.” 18So Samuel called to the LORD [in prayer], and He sent thunder and rain that day; and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel.

19Then all the people said to Samuel, “Pray to the LORD your God for your servants, so that we will not die, for we have added to all our sins this evil—to ask for a king for ourselves.” 20Samuel said to the people, “Do not be afraid. You have [indeed] done all this evil; yet do not turn away from following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart. 21You must not turn away, for then you would go after futile things which cannot profit or rescue, because they are futile. 22The LORD will not abandon His people for His great name’s sake, because the LORD has been pleased to make you a people for Himself. 23Moreover, as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against the LORD by ceasing to pray for you; but I will instruct you in the good and right way. 24Only fear the LORD [with awe and profound reverence] and serve Him faithfully with all your heart; for consider what great things He has done for you. 25“But if you still do evil, both you and your king will be swept away [to destruction].”

1 Samuel 13
War With The Philistines

1Saul was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty-two years over Israel.

2Saul chose for himself 3,000 men of Israel; of whom 2,000 were with him in Michmash and in the hill country of Bethel, while 1,000 were with Jonathan at Gibeah of Benjamin. But he sent the rest of the people away, each one to his own tent. 3Jonathan attacked and defeated the Philistine garrison which was at Geba, and the Philistines heard about it. Then Saul blew the trumpet throughout the land, saying, “Let the Hebrews hear.” 4All Israel heard that Saul had defeated the Philistine garrison, and also that Israel had become despicable to the Philistines. And the people were summoned to join Saul at Gilgal.

5Now the Philistines gathered to fight against Israel, 30,000 chariots and 6,000 horsemen, and troops in multitude, like sand on the seashore. They came up and camped at Michmash, east of Beth-aven. 6When the men of Israel saw that they were in a tight situation (for their troops were hard-pressed), they hid in caves, in thickets, in cellars, and in [dry] cisterns (pits). 7Also some of the Hebrews had crossed the [river] Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. As for Saul, he was still in Gilgal, and all the people followed him, trembling [in fear and anticipation].

8Now Saul waited seven days, according to the appointed time which Samuel had set, but Samuel had not come to Gilgal; and the people were scattering away from Saul. 9So Saul said, “Bring me the burnt offering and the peace offerings.” And he offered the burnt offering [which he was forbidden to do]. 10As soon as he finished offering the burnt offering, Samuel finally came; Saul went out to meet and to welcome him. 11But Samuel said, “What have you done?” Saul said, “Since I saw that the people were scattering away from me, and that you did not come within the appointed time, and that the Philistines were assembling at Michmash, 12therefore, I said, ‘Now the Philistines will come down against me at Gilgal, and I have not asked for the LORD’S favor [by making supplication to Him].’ So I forced myself to offer the burnt offering.” 13Samuel said to Saul, “You have acted foolishly; you have not kept the commandment of the LORD your God, which He commanded you, for [if you had obeyed] the LORD would have established your kingdom over Israel forever. 14“But now your kingdom shall not endure. The LORD has sought out for Himself a man (David) after His own heart, and the LORD has appointed him as leader and ruler over His people, because you have not kept (obeyed) what the LORD commanded you.”

15Then Samuel arose and went up from Gilgal to Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul assembled and counted the people who were still with him, [only] about six hundred [fighting] men. 16Saul and his son Jonathan and the people with them were staying in Geba of Benjamin, while the Philistines camped at Michmash. 17And the raiding party came from the Philistine camp in three companies: one company turned toward Ophrah, to the land of Shual, 18another company turned toward Beth-horon, and another toward the border overlooking the Valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.

19Now no blacksmith (metal-worker) could be found in all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, “Otherwise the Hebrews will make swords or spears.” 20So all [the men of] Israel went down to the Philistines, each to get his plowshare, pick, axe, or sickle sharpened. 21The fee [for sharpening] was a pim (two-thirds of a shekel) for the plowshares, the picks, the pitchforks, and the axes, and to straighten the goads (cattle prods). 22So it came about on the day of battle that neither sword nor spear was found in the hands of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonathan; but Saul and Jonathan his son had them. 23And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the pass at Michmash.

1 Samuel 14
Jonathan’s Victory

1One day Jonathan the son of Saul said to his young armor bearer, “Come, let us go over to the Philistine garrison on the other side.” But he did not tell his father. 2Saul was staying in the outskirts of Gibeah under a pomegranate tree in Migron; and with him were about six hundred men, 3and Ahijah the son of Ichabod’s brother Ahitub the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD’S priest at Shiloh, was wearing the ephod. And the people did not know that Jonathan had gone. 4Between the passes by which Jonathan sought to cross over to get to the Philistine garrison, there was a rocky crag on the one side and a rocky crag on the other side; one [crag] was named Bozez, and the other, Seneh. 5The one crag was on the north in front of Michmash, and the other on the south in front of Geba.

6Jonathan said to his young armor bearer, “Come, let us cross over to the garrison of these uncircumcised men; it may be that the LORD will work for us. For there is nothing to prevent the LORD from saving, whether by many or by few.” 7And his armor bearer said to him, “Do everything that is in your heart (mind); here I am with you in whatever you think [best].” 8Jonathan said, “See now, we are going to cross over to the [Philistine] men and reveal ourselves to them. 9If they say to us, ‘Wait until we come to you,’ then we will stand in our place and not go up to them. 10“But if they say, ‘Come up to us,’ we will go up, for the LORD has handed them over to us; and this shall be the sign to us.” 11When both of them revealed themselves to the garrison of the Philistines, the Philistines said, “Look, the Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they have hidden themselves.” 12So the men of the garrison responded to Jonathan and his armor bearer, “Come up to us and we will tell you something.” Jonathan said to his armor bearer, “Climb up after me, for the LORD has given them into the hands of Israel.” 13Then Jonathan climbed up on his hands and feet, his armor bearer following after him. The enemy fell before Jonathan [in combat], and his armor bearer killed some of them after him. 14That first slaughter which Jonathan and his armor bearer made was about twenty men within about half a [plow] furrow in a plot of land [the area of which a yoke of oxen could plow in a day]. 15And there was trembling in the [Philistine] camp, in the field, and among all the people; even the garrison and the raiding party trembled [in fear], and the earth quaked and it became a trembling and terror from God.

16Saul’s watchmen in Gibeah of Benjamin looked, and behold, the multitude melted away and they went here and there. 17Then Saul said to the people with him, “Take a count and see who has left us.” When they had taken a count, behold, Jonathan and his armor bearer were missing. 18Saul said to Ahijah [the priest], “Bring the ark of God here.” For at that time the ark of God was with the sons of Israel. 19While Saul talked to the priest, the commotion in the Philistine camp continued and increased, so Saul said to the priest, “Withdraw your hand.” 20Then Saul and all the people who were with him rallied and went into the battle; and behold, every [Philistine] man’s sword was against his companion, in wild confusion. 21Now the Hebrews who were with the Philistines previously, who went up with them all around in the camp, they also turned to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan. 22When all the men of Israel who had hidden themselves in the hill country of Ephraim heard that the Philistines had fled, they too pursued them closely in the battle. 23So the LORD saved Israel that day, and the battle spread beyond Beth-aven.

Saul’s Foolish Order 24But the men of Israel were hard-pressed that day, because Saul had put the people under a curse, saying, “Cursed be the man who eats food before evening, and before I have taken vengeance on my enemies.” So none of the people ate any food. 25All the people of the land came to a forest, and there was honey on the ground. 26When the people entered the forest, the honey was dripping, but no man put his hand to his mouth [to taste it], because the people feared the oath [of Saul]. 27But Jonathan had not heard when his father put the people under the oath. So he put out the end of the staff that was in his hand and dipped it into a honeycomb, and then he put his hand to his mouth, and his energy was restored. 28But one of the people told him, “Your father strictly put the people under an oath, saying, ‘Cursed be the man who eats food today.’” And the people were exhausted [and hungry]. 29Then Jonathan said, “My father has troubled the land [with his foolish curse]. See how my energy is restored because I tasted a little of this honey. 30How much better [it would have been] if only the people had eaten freely today from the spoil of their enemies which they found! For now the slaughter among the Philistines has not been great.”

31They struck the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon. And the people were very tired. 32[When night came and the oath ended] the people rushed greedily upon the spoil. They took sheep, oxen, and calves, and slaughtered them on the ground; and they ate them [raw] with the blood [still in them]. 33Then Saul was told, “Look, the people are sinning against the LORD by eating [the meat] with the blood.” And he said, “You have violated [the Law] and acted treacherously; roll a large stone to me today.” 34Saul said, “Spread out among the people and tell them, ‘Each one of you bring me his ox or his sheep, and butcher it [properly] here and eat; and do not sin against the LORD by eating [the meat with] the blood.’” So that night each one brought his ox with him and butchered it there. 35And Saul built an altar to the LORD; it was the first altar that he built to the LORD.

36Then Saul said, “Let us go down after the Philistines by night and plunder them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them [alive].” They said, “Do whatever seems good to you.” Then the priest said, “Let us approach God here.” 37Saul asked [counsel] of God, “Shall I go down after the Philistines? Will You hand them over to Israel?” But He did not answer him that day. 38Then Saul said, “Come here, all you who are leaders of the people, and let us find out how this sin [causing God’s silence] happened today. 39“For as the LORD lives, who saves Israel, for even if the guilt is in my son Jonathan, he shall most certainly die.” But not one of all the people answered him. 40Then he said to all the Israelites, “You shall be on one side; I and my son Jonathan will be on the other side.” The people said to Saul, “Do what seems good to you.” 41Therefore, Saul said to the LORD, the God of Israel, “Give a perfect lot [identifying the transgressor].” Then Saul and Jonathan were selected [by lot], but the other men went free. 42Saul said, “Cast [lots] between me and my son Jonathan.” And Jonathan was selected.

43Saul said to Jonathan, “Tell me what you have done.” So Jonathan told him, “I tasted a little honey with the end of the staff that was in my hand. Here I am, I must die!” 44Saul answered, “May God do so [to me], and more also [if I do not keep my word], for you shall most certainly die, Jonathan.” 45But the people said to Saul, “Must Jonathan, who has brought about this great victory in Israel, be put to death? Far from it! As the LORD lives, not one hair of his head shall fall to the ground, for he has worked with God this day.” So the people rescued Jonathan and he was not put to death. 46Then Saul stopped pursuing the Philistines, and the Philistines went to their own place.

Constant Warfare 47When Saul assumed control of the kingdom of Israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side: Moab, the sons (descendants) of Ammon, Edom, the kings of Zobah, and the Philistines. Wherever he turned, he inflicted punishment. 48He acted valiantly and defeated the Amalekites, and rescued Israel from the hands of those who had plundered them.

49Now Saul’s sons were Jonathan, Ishvi, and Malchi-shua. The names of his two daughters were these: the name of the firstborn was Merab, and the name of the younger, Michal. 50The name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz. The commander of his army was named Abner, the son of Ner, Saul’s uncle. 51Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.

52Now the war against the Philistines was severe (brutal, relentless) all the days of Saul; and whenever Saul saw any mighty or courageous man, he recruited him for his staff.

1 Samuel 15
Saul’s Disobedience

1Samuel said to Saul, “The Lord sent me to anoint you king over His people Israel. Now listen and pay close attention to the words of the Lord. 2Thus says the LORD of hosts (armies), ‘I will punish Amalek for what he did to Israel, how he set himself against him on the way when Israel came up from Egypt. 3‘Now go and strike Amalek and completely destroy everything that they have; do not spare them, but kill both man and woman, child and infant, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.’”

4So Saul summoned the people and numbered them at Telaim—200,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 men of Judah. 5Saul came to the city of Amalek and set an ambush in the valley. 6Saul said to the Kenites, “Go, leave, go down from the Amalekites, so that I do not destroy you along with them; for you showed kindness to all the Israelites when they went up from Egypt.” So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites. 7Saul defeated the Amalekites, from Havilah as far as Shur, which is east of Egypt. 8He captured Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, though he totally destroyed all [the rest of] the people with the sword. 9Saul and the people spared Agag and the best of the sheep, the oxen, the fatlings, the lambs, and everything that was good, and they were not willing to destroy them entirely; but everything that was undesirable or worthless they destroyed completely.

Samuel Rebukes Saul 10Then the word of the LORD came to Samuel, saying, 11“I regret that I made Saul king, for he has turned away from following Me and has not carried out My commands.” Samuel was angry [over Saul’s failure] and he cried out to the LORD all night. 12When Samuel got up early in the morning to meet Saul, he was told, “Saul came to Carmel, and behold, he set up for himself a monument [commemorating his victory], then he turned and went on and went down to Gilgal.” 13So Samuel came to Saul, and Saul said to him, “Blessed are you of the LORD. I have carried out the command of the LORD.” 14But Samuel said, “What then is this bleating of the sheep in my ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?” 15Saul said, “They have brought them from the Amalekites, for the people spared the best of the sheep and oxen to sacrifice to the LORD your God; but the rest we have destroyed completely.” 16Then Samuel said to Saul, “Stop, and let me tell you what the LORD said to me last night.” Saul said to him, “Speak.”

17Samuel said, “Is it not true that even though you were small (insignificant) in your own eyes, you were made the head of the tribes of Israel? And the LORD anointed you king over Israel, 18and the LORD sent you on a mission, and said, ‘Go, totally destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them until they are eliminated.’ 19“Why did you not obey the voice of the LORD, but [instead] swooped down on the plunder [with shouts of victory] and did evil in the sight of the LORD?”

20Saul said to Samuel, “I have obeyed the voice of the LORD, and have gone on the mission on which the LORD sent me, and have brought back Agag the king of Amalek, and have completely destroyed the Amalekites. 21“But the people took some of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the best of the things [that were] to be totally destroyed, to sacrifice to the LORD your God at Gilgal.” 22Samuel said,
“Has the LORD as great a delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices
As in obedience to the voice of the LORD?
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice,
And to heed [is better] than the fat of rams.
23“For rebellion is as [serious as] the sin of divination (fortune-telling),
And disobedience is as [serious as] false religion and idolatry.
Because you have rejected the word of the LORD,
He also has rejected you as king.”

24Then Saul said to Samuel, “I have sinned; for I have transgressed the command of the LORD and your words, because I feared the people and obeyed their voice. 25“Now, please, pardon my sin and return with me, so that I may worship the LORD.” 26But Samuel said to Saul, “I will not return with you; for you have rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD has rejected you from being king over Israel.” 27As Samuel turned to go [away], Saul grabbed the hem of his robe [to stop him], and it tore. 28So Samuel said to him, “The LORD has torn the kingdom of Israel from you today and has given it to your neighbor, who is better than you. 29“Also the Splendor and Glory and Eminence of Israel will not lie or change His mind; for He is not a man that He should change His mind.” 30Saul said, “I have sinned; but please honor me now before the elders of my people and before Israel, and go back with me, so that I may worship the LORD your God.” 31So Samuel went back following Saul, and Saul worshiped the LORD.

32Then Samuel said, “Bring me Agag, the king of the Amalekites.” And Agag came to him cheerfully. And Agag said, “Surely the bitterness of death has come to an end.” 33Samuel said, “As your sword has made women childless, so shall your mother be childless among women.” And Samuel cut Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal.

34Then Samuel went to Ramah, but Saul went up to his house in Gibeah of Saul. 35Samuel did not see Saul again until the day of his death, for Samuel grieved over Saul. And the LORD regretted that He had made Saul king over Israel.

1 Samuel 16
Samuel Goes To Bethlehem

1The LORD said to Samuel, “How long will you grieve for Saul, when I have rejected him as king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go; I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have chosen a king for Myself among his sons.” 2But Samuel said, “How can I go? When Saul hears about it, he will kill me.” And the LORD said, “Take a heifer from the herd with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to the Lord.’ 3“You shall invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show you what you shall do [after that]; and you shall anoint for Me the one whom I designate.” 4So Samuel did what the LORD said, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the city came trembling to meet him and said, “Do you come in peace?” 5And he said, “In peace; I have come to sacrifice to the LORD. Consecrate yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice.” He also consecrated Jesse and his sons and invited them to the sacrifice.

6So it happened, when they had come, he looked at Eliab [the eldest son] and thought, “Surely the LORD’S anointed is before Him.” 7But the LORD said to Samuel, “Do not look at his appearance or at the height of his stature, because I have rejected him. For the LORD sees not as man sees; for man looks at the outward appearance, but the LORD looks at the heart.” 8Then Jesse called Abinadab and had him pass before Samuel. But Samuel said, “The LORD has not chosen this one either.” 9Next Jesse had Shammah pass by. And Samuel said, “The LORD has not chosen him either.” 10Jesse had seven of his sons pass before Samuel. But Samuel said to Jesse, “The LORD has not chosen [any of] these.” 11Then Samuel said to Jesse, “Are all your sons here?” Jesse replied, “There is still one left, the youngest; he is tending the sheep.” Samuel said to Jesse, “Send word and bring him; because we will not sit down [to eat the sacrificial meal] until he comes here.” David Anointed 12So Jesse sent word and brought him in. Now he had a ruddy complexion, with beautiful eyes and a handsome appearance. The LORD said [to Samuel], “Arise, anoint him; for this is he.” 13Then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed David in the presence of his brothers; and the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon David from that day forward. And Samuel arose and went to Ramah.

14Now the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord tormented and terrified him. 15Saul’s servants said to him, “Behold, an evil spirit from God is tormenting you. 16“Let our lord now command your servants who are here before you to find a man who plays skillfully on the harp; and when the evil spirit from God is on you, he shall play the harp with his hand, and you will be well.” 17So Saul told his servants, “Find me a man who plays well and bring him to me.” 18One of the young men said, “Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite who is a skillful musician, a brave and competent man, a warrior, discerning (prudent, eloquent) in speech, and a handsome man; and the LORD is with him.” 19So Saul sent messengers to Jesse and said, “Send me David your son, who is with the flock.” 20Jesse took a donkey [loaded with] bread and a jug of wine and a young goat, and sent them to Saul with David his son. 21Then David came to Saul and attended him. Saul loved him greatly and [later] David became his armor bearer. 22Saul sent word to Jesse, saying, “Please let David be my attendant, for he has found favor in my sight.” 23So it came about that whenever the [evil] spirit from God was on Saul, David took a harp and played it with his hand; so Saul would be refreshed and be well, and the evil spirit would leave him.

1 Samuel 17
Goliath’s Challenge

1Now the Philistines gathered their armies for battle and were assembled at Socoh, which belongs to Judah; and they camped between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-dammim. 2Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together and they camped in the Valley of Elah, and assembled in battle formation to meet the Philistines. 3The Philistines were standing on the mountain on one side and Israel was standing on the mountain on the other side, with the valley between them. 4Then a champion came out from the camp of the Philistines named Goliath of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span. 5He had a bronze helmet on his head, and wore a coat of scale-armor (overlapping metal plates) which weighed 5,000 shekels of bronze. 6He had bronze shin protectors on his legs and a bronze javelin hung between his shoulders. 7The [wooden] shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s beam; the blade-head of his spear weighed six hundred shekels of iron. And a shield-bearer walked in front of him. 8Goliath stood and shouted to the battle lines of Israel, saying to them, “Why have you come out to draw up for battle? Am I not the Philistine and are you not servants of Saul? Choose a man for yourselves and have him come down to me. 9“If he is able to fight with me and kill me, then we will become your servants; but if I prevail against him and kill him, then you shall become our servants and serve us.” 10Again the Philistine said, “I defy the battle lines of Israel this day; give me a man so that we may fight together.” 11When Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistine, they were dismayed and greatly afraid.

12Now David was the son of the Ephrathite of Bethlehem in Judah, named Jesse, who had eight sons. Jesse was old in the days of Saul, advanced in years among men. 13His three older sons had followed Saul into battle. The names of his three sons who went to battle were Eliab, the firstborn; next, Abinadab; and third, Shammah. 14David was the youngest. Now the three oldest followed Saul, 15but David went back and forth from Saul to tend his father’s flock at Bethlehem. 16The Philistine [Goliath] came out morning and evening, and took his stand for forty days.

17Then Jesse said to David his son, “Take for your brothers an ephah of this roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread and run quickly to the camp to your brothers. 18Also take these ten cuts of cheese to the commander of the unit. See how your brothers are doing and bring back news of them. 19“Now they are with Saul and all the men of Israel in the Valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.”

David Accepts the Challenge 20So David got up early in the morning, left the flock with a keeper, picked up the provisions and went just as Jesse had directed him. And he came to the encampment as the army was going out in battle formation shouting the battle cry. 21Israel and the Philistines drew up in battle formation, army against army. 22Then David left his provisions in the care of the supply keeper, and ran to the ranks and came and greeted his brothers. 23As he was talking with them, behold, the champion, the Philistine of Gath named Goliath, was coming up from the army of the Philistines, and he spoke these same words again; and David heard him.

24When the men of Israel all saw the man, they fled from him, and were very frightened. 25The men of Israel said, “Have you seen this man who is coming up? Surely he is coming up to defy Israel. The king will reward the man who kills him with great riches, and will give him his daughter [in marriage] and make his father’s house (family) free [from taxes and service] in Israel.”

26Then David spoke to the men who were standing by him, “What will be done for the man who kills this Philistine and removes the disgrace [of his taunting] from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he has taunted and defied the armies of the living God?” 27The men told him, “That is what will be done for the man who kills him.”

28Now Eliab his oldest brother heard what he said to the men; and Eliab’s anger burned against David and he said, “Why have you come down here? With whom did you leave those few sheep in the wilderness? I know your presumption (overconfidence) and the evil of your heart; for you have come down in order to see the battle.” 29But David said, “What have I done now? Was it not just a [harmless] question?” 30Then David turned away from Eliab to someone else and asked the same question; and the people gave him the same answer as the first time.

David Kills Goliath 31When the words that David spoke were heard, the men reported them to Saul, and he sent for him. 32David said to Saul, “Let no man’s courage fail because of him (Goliath). Your servant will go out and fight with this Philistine.” 33Then Saul said to David, “You are not able to go against this Philistine to fight him. For you are [only] a young man and he has been a warrior since his youth.” 34But David said to Saul, “Your servant was tending his father’s sheep. When a lion or a bear came and took a lamb out of the flock, 35I went out after it and attacked it and rescued the lamb from its mouth; and when it rose up against me, I seized it by its whiskers and struck and killed it. 36“Your servant has killed both the lion and the bear; and this uncircumcised Philistine will be like one of them, since he has taunted and defied the armies of the living God.” 37David said, “The LORD who rescued me from the paw of the lion and from the paw of the bear, He will rescue me from the hand of this Philistine.” And Saul said to David, “Go, and may the LORD be with you.” 38Then Saul dressed David in his garments and put a bronze helmet on his head, and put a coat of mail (armor) on him. 39Then David fastened his sword over his armor and tried to walk, [but he could not,] because he was not used to them. And David said to Saul, “I cannot go with these, because I am not used to them.” So David took them off. 40Then he took his [shepherd’s] staff in his hand and chose for himself five smooth stones out of the stream bed, and put them in his shepherd’s bag which he had, that is, in his shepherd’s pouch. With his sling in his hand, he approached the Philistine.

41The Philistine came and approached David, with his shield-bearer in front of him. 42When the Philistine looked around and saw David, he derided and disparaged him because he was [just] a young man, with a ruddy complexion, and a handsome appearance. 43The Philistine said to David, “Am I a dog, that you come to me with [shepherd’s] staffs?” And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. 44The Philistine also said to David, “Come to me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the sky and the beasts of the field.” 45Then David said to the Philistine, “You come to me with a sword, a spear, and a javelin, but I come to you in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have taunted. 46This day the LORD will hand you over to me, and I will strike you down and cut off your head. And I will give the corpses of the army of the Philistines this day to the birds of the sky and the wild beasts of the earth, so that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel, 47and that this entire assembly may know that the LORD does not save with the sword or with the spear; for the battle is the LORD’S and He will hand you over to us.”

48When the Philistine rose and came forward to meet David, David ran quickly toward the battle line to meet the Philistine. 49David put his hand into his bag and took out a stone and slung it, and it struck the Philistine on his forehead. The stone penetrated his forehead, and he fell face down on the ground.

50So David triumphed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone, and he struck down the Philistine and killed him; but there was no sword in David’s hand. 51So he ran and stood over the Philistine, grasped his sword and drew it out of its sheath and killed him, and cut off his head with it. When the Philistines saw that their [mighty] champion was dead, they fled. 52The men of Israel and Judah stood with a shout and pursued the Philistines as far as the entrance to the valley and the gates of Ekron. And the [fatally] wounded Philistines fell along the way to Shaaraim, even as far as Gath and Ekron. 53The sons of Israel returned from their pursuit of the Philistines and plundered their camp. 54Then David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put his weapons in his tent.

55When Saul saw David going out against the Philistine, he said to Abner the captain of the army, “Abner, whose son is this young man?” And Abner answered, “By your life, O king, I do not know.” 56The king said, “Ask whose son the young man is.” 57When David returned from killing [Goliath] the Philistine, Abner took him and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand. 58Saul asked him, “Whose son are you, young man?” And David answered, “I am the son of your servant Jesse of Bethlehem.”

1 Samuel 18
Jonathan And David

1When David had finished speaking to Saul, the soul of Jonathan was bonded to the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as himself. 2Saul took David that day and did not let him return to his father’s house. 3Then Jonathan made a covenant with David because he loved him as himself. 4Jonathan stripped himself of the outer robe that he was wearing and gave it to David, with his armor, including his sword, his bow, and his belt. 5So David went out wherever Saul sent him, and he acted wisely and prospered; and Saul appointed him over the men of war. And it pleased all the people and also Saul’s servants.

6As they were coming [home], when David returned from killing the Philistine, the women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet King Saul with tambourines, [songs of] joy, and musical instruments. 7The women sang as they played and danced, saying,
“Saul has slain his thousands,
And David his ten thousands.”

8Then Saul became very angry, for this saying displeased him; and he said, “They have ascribed to David ten thousands, but to me they have ascribed [only] thousands. Now what more can he have but the kingdom?” 9Saul looked at David with suspicion [and jealously] from that day forward.

Saul Turns against David 10Now it came about on the next day that an evil spirit from God came forcefully on Saul, and he raved [madly] inside his house, while David was playing the harp with his hand, as usual; and there was a spear in Saul’s hand. 11Saul hurled the spear, for he thought, “I will pin David to the wall.” But David evaded him twice.

12Now Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, but had departed from Saul. 13So Saul had David removed from his presence and appointed him as his commander of a thousand; and he publicly associated with the people. 14David acted wisely and prospered in all his ways, and the LORD was with him. 15When Saul saw that he was prospering greatly, he was afraid of him. 16But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he publicly associated with them.

17Then Saul said to David, “Behold I will give you my older daughter Merab as a wife; only be brave for me and fight the LORD’S battles.” For Saul thought, “My hand shall not be against him, but let the hand of the Philistines be against him.” 18David said to Saul, “Who am I, and what is my life or my father’s family in Israel, that I should be the king’s son-in-law?” 19But at the time when Merab, Saul’s daughter, should have been given to David, she was [instead] given to Adriel the Meholathite as a wife.

David Marries Saul’s Daughter 20Now Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved David; and when they told Saul, it pleased him. 21Saul said, “I will give her to him so that she may become a snare (bad influence, source of trouble) to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him.” So Saul said to David for a second time, “You shall be my son-in-law today.” 22Then Saul commanded his servants, “Speak to David secretly, saying, ‘Listen, the king delights in you, and all his servants love you; now then, become the king’s son-in-law.’” 23So Saul’s servants spoke these words to David. But David said, “Is it a trivial thing in your sight to become a king’s son-in-law, seeing that I am a poor man and insignificant?” 24The servants of Saul told him what David said. 25Then Saul said, “This is what you shall say to David: ‘The king wants no dowry except a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to take vengeance on the king’s enemies.’” Now Saul’s intention was to cause David’s death at the hand of the Philistines. 26When his servants told David these words, it pleased him to become the king’s son-in-law. Before the time [for the marriage] arrived, 27David arose and went, he and his men, and killed two hundred Philistine men, and David brought their foreskins [as proof of death] and presented every one of them to the king, so that he might become the king’s son-in-law. So Saul gave him Michal, his [younger] daughter, as a wife. 28When Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that Michal, his daughter, loved him, 29Saul was even more afraid of David; and Saul became David’s constant enemy.

30Then the Philistine commanders (princes) came out to battle, and it happened as often as they did, that David acted more wisely and had more success than all Saul’s servants. So his name was highly esteemed.

1 Samuel 19
David Protected From Saul

1Now Saul told his son Jonathan and all his servants to kill David, but Jonathan, Saul’s son, greatly delighted in David. 2So he told David, “Saul my father is seeking to kill you. Now then, please be on guard in the morning, and stay in a secret place and hide yourself. 3“As for me, I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where you are, and I will speak with my father about you, and if I learn anything, then I will tell you.” 4Then Jonathan spoke well of David to Saul his father and said to him, “May the king not sin against his servant David, since he has not sinned against you, and since his deeds have been very beneficial to you. 5“For he took his life in his hand and killed the Philistine, and the LORD brought about a great victory for all Israel; you saw it and rejoiced. Why then would you sin against innocent blood by killing David without a cause?” 6Saul listened to Jonathan and swore [an oath], “As the LORD lives, he shall not be put to death.” 7So Jonathan called David and told him all these things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence [serving him] as previously.

8Then there was war again, and David went out and fought with the Philistines and defeated them with a great slaughter, and they fled before him. 9Then an evil spirit from the LORD came on Saul as he was sitting in his house with his spear in his hand, and David was playing the harp with his hand. 10Saul tried to pin David to the wall with the spear, but he escaped from Saul’s presence, so that Saul only stuck the spear into the wall. Then David fled and escaped that night.

11Then Saul sent messengers to David’s house to watch for him, so that he might kill him in the morning. But Michal, David’s wife, told him, “If you do not save your life tonight, tomorrow you will be killed.” 12So Michal let David down through the window, and he fled and escaped. 13And Michal took the household idol and laid it on the bed, put a pillow of goats’ hair at its head, and covered it with clothes. 14And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, “He is sick.” 15Then Saul sent the messengers [again] to see David, saying, “Bring him up to me on his bed [if necessary], so that I may kill him.” 16When the messengers came in, there was the household idol on the bed with a quilt of goats’ hair at its head. 17Saul said to Michal, “Why have you deceived me like this and let my enemy go, so that he has escaped?” Michal answered Saul, “He said to me, ‘Let me go! Why should I kill you?’”

18So David fled and escaped and came to Samuel at Ramah, and told him everything that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and stayed in Naioth. 19Saul was told, “David is at Naioth in Ramah.” 20Then Saul sent messengers to take David; but when they saw the group of prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing and presiding over them, the Spirit of God came on the messengers of Saul; and they also prophesied. 21When Saul was informed, he sent other messengers, and they also prophesied. So Saul sent messengers again, the third time, and they prophesied as well. 22Then Saul went to Ramah himself and came to the great well that is in Secu; and he asked, “Where are Samuel and David?” And he was told, “They are at Naioth [with the prophets] in Ramah.” 23So he went on to Naioth in Ramah; and the Spirit of God came upon him too, and he went along continually prophesying until he came to Naioth in Ramah. 24He also took off his [royal] robes [and armor] and prophesied before Samuel and lay down naked all that day and night. So they say, “Is Saul also among the prophets?”

1 Samuel 20
David And Jonathan’s Covenant

1David fled from Naioth in Ramah and he came and said to Jonathan, “What have I done? What is my guilt? What is my sin before (against) your father, that he is seeking my life?” 2Jonathan said to him, “Far from it! You shall not die. My father does nothing important or insignificant without telling me. So why would he hide this thing from me? It is not so!” 3But David vowed again, saying “Your father certainly knows that I have found favor in your sight, and he has said, ‘Do not let Jonathan know this, or he will be worried.’ But truly as the LORD lives and as your soul lives, there is hardly a step between me and death.” 4Then Jonathan said to David, “Whatever you say, I will do for you.” 5David said to Jonathan, “Behold, tomorrow is the New Moon [observance], and I should sit at the table to eat [the sacrificial meal] with the king; but let me go, so that I may hide myself in the field until the third evening. 6If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David earnestly asked permission from me to go to Bethlehem, his city, because it is the yearly sacrifice there for the entire family.’ 7If he says, ‘All right,’ your servant will be safe; but if he is very angry, then be certain that he has decided on evil. 8“Therefore show kindness to your servant, because you have brought your servant into a covenant of the LORD with you. But if there is iniquity (guilt) in me, kill me yourself; for why should you bring me to your father [to be killed]?” 9Jonathan said, “Far be it from [happening to] you! In fact, if I indeed learn that my father has decided to harm you, would I not tell you about it?” 10Then David said to Jonathan, “Who will tell me if your father answers you harshly?” 11Jonathan said to David, “Come, let us go out into the field [to talk].” So they went out to the field.

12Then Jonathan said to David, “The LORD, the God of Israel, is my witness! When I have sounded out my father about this time tomorrow, or the third day, behold, if he has a good feeling toward you, shall I not then send word to you and make it known to you? 13But if it pleases my father to do you harm, may the LORD do so to Jonathan, and more if I do not let you know about it and send you away, so that you may go in safety. And may the LORD be with you as He has been with my father. 14If I am still alive, will you not show me the lovingkindness and faithfulness of the LORD, so that I will not die? 15“You shall never cut off your lovingkindness and faithfulness from my house, not even when the LORD cuts off every one of the enemies of David from the face of the earth.” 16So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David. [He added,] “May the LORD require it at the hands of David’s enemies. [that is, hold them accountable for any harm they inflict on David].” 17Jonathan made David vow again because of his love for him, for Jonathan loved him as himself.

18Then Jonathan said to David, “Tomorrow is the New Moon [festival], and you will be missed because your seat will be empty. 19When you have stayed for three days, you shall go down quickly and come to the place where you hid yourself on that eventful day [when my father tried to kill you], and shall stay by the stone Ezel. 20I will shoot three arrows to the side of it, as though I shot at a target. 21And I will send a boy, saying, ‘Go, find the arrows.’ If I specifically say to the boy, ‘Look, the arrows are on this side of you, get them,’ then come [back to my father’s table]; for it is safe for you and there is no danger, as the LORD lives. 22But if I say to the boy, ‘Look, the arrows are beyond you,’ then go, for the LORD has sent you away. 23“As for the agreement of which you and I have spoken, behold, the LORD is between you and me forever [making sure that we each keep our word].”

24So David hid in the field; and when the New Moon [festival] came, the king sat down to eat food. 25The king sat on his seat as on previous occasions, on his seat by the wall; then Jonathan stood up, and Abner [his commander] sat down by Saul’s side, but David’s place was empty. 26Yet Saul did not say anything that day, for he thought, “It is an incident [of some kind] and he is not [ceremonially] clean—surely he is unclean.” 27But on the next day, the second day of the new moon, David’s place was empty [again]; and Saul said to Jonathan his son, “Why has the son of Jesse not come to the meal, either yesterday or today?” 28Jonathan answered Saul, “David earnestly asked me for permission to go to Bethlehem. 29He said, ‘Please let me go because our family is holding a sacrifice in the city, and my brother has commanded me to attend. Now, if I have found favor in your eyes, please let me slip away so that I may see my brothers.’ That is why he has not come to the king’s table.”

Saul Is Angry with Jonathan 30Then Saul’s anger burned against Jonathan and he said to him, “You son of a wayward, rebellious woman! Do I not know that you have chosen the son of Jesse [over me] to your own shame, and to the shame of your mother’s nakedness? 31“For as long as the son of Jesse lives on the earth, neither you [as heir to the throne] nor your kingdom will be established. So now, send [someone] and bring him to me, for he must die.” 32Jonathan answered Saul his father, “Why must he be put to death? What has he done?” 33Then Saul hurled his spear at him to strike him down, so Jonathan knew [without any doubt] that his father had decided to put David to death. 34Then Jonathan stood up from the table in the heat of anger, and ate no food on that second day of the new moon (month), for he grieved and worried about David because his father had dishonored him.

35In the morning Jonathan went out to the field for the meeting with David, and a young boy was with him. 36And he said to his boy, “Run, please find the arrows which I am about to shoot.” As the boy ran, he shot an arrow past him. 37When the boy came to the place where Jonathan had shot the arrow, Jonathan called to him, “Is the arrow not beyond you?” 38And Jonathan called out after the boy, “Hurry, be quick, do not stay!” So Jonathan’s boy picked up the arrow and came back to his master. 39But the boy was not aware of anything; only Jonathan and David knew about the matter. 40Jonathan gave his weapons to his boy and said to him, “Go, take them to the city.” 41As soon as the boy was gone, David got up from the south side [beside the mound of stones] and fell on his face to the ground [in submission and respect], and bowed three times. Then they kissed one another and wept together, but David wept more. 42Jonathan told David, “Go in safety, inasmuch as we have sworn to each other in the name of the LORD, saying, ‘The LORD shall be between me and you, and between my descendants and yours forever.’” Then he stood and left, while Jonathan went into the city.

1 Samuel 21
David Takes Consecrated Bread

1Then David went to Nob to Ahimelech the priest; and Ahimelech came trembling [in fear] to meet David and said to him, “Why are you alone, and no one with you?” 2David said to Ahimelech the priest, “The king has commissioned me with a matter and has told me, ‘Let no one know anything about the matter for which I am sending you and with which I have commissioned you. I have directed the young men to a certain place.’ 3“Now what [food] do you have on hand? Give me five loaves of bread, or whatever can be found.” 4The priest answered David, “There is no ordinary (unconsecrated) bread on hand, but there is consecrated bread; [you may have it] if only the young men have kept themselves from women.” 5David answered the priest, “Be assured that women have been kept from us in these three days since I set out, and the bodies of the young men were consecrated (ceremonially clean), although it was an ordinary (unconsecrated) journey; so how much more will their vessels be holy today?” 6So the priest gave him the consecrated bread; for there was no bread there except the bread of the Presence which was removed from before the LORD in order to put hot bread in its place when it was taken away.

7Now one of Saul’s servants was there that day, detained before the LORD; his name was Doeg the Edomite, the chief of Saul’s shepherds.

8David said to Ahimelech, “Do you not have a sword or spear here on hand? For I brought neither my sword nor my [other] weapons with me, because the king’s business was urgent.” 9Then the priest said, “The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you killed in the Valley of Elah, is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod; if you would take it for yourself, do so. For there is no other here except for it.” And David said, “There is none like that; give it to me.”

10Then David arose and fled from Saul that day, and went to Achish king of Gath. 11The servants of Achish said to him, “Is this not David the king of the land? Did they not sing in praise of this one as they danced, saying,
‘Saul has slain his thousands,
And David his ten thousands’?”

12David took these words to heart and was greatly afraid of Achish king of Gath. 13So [fearing for his life] he changed his behavior in their sight, and acted insanely in their hands, and he scribbled on the doors of the gate, and drooled on his beard. 14Then Achish said to his servants, “Look, you see that the man is insane. Why have you brought him to me? 15“Do I lack madmen, that you bring this one to behave like a madman in my presence? Shall this one come into my house?”

1 Samuel 22
The Priests Slain At Nob

1So David departed from there and escaped to the cave of Adullam; and when his brothers and all his father’s house heard about it, they went down there to him. 2Everyone who was suffering hardship, and everyone who was in debt, and everyone who was discontented gathered to him; and he became captain over them. There were about four hundred men with him.

3And David went from there to Mizpah of Moab; and he said to the king of Moab, “Please let my father and my mother come [out of Judah] and stay with you until I know what God will do for me.” 4Then he left them with the king of Moab; and they stayed with him all the time that David was in the stronghold. 5Then the prophet Gad said to David, “Do not stay in the stronghold; leave, and go into the land of Judah.” So David left and went into the forest of Hereth.

6But Saul heard that David and the men who were with him had been discovered. Now Saul was in Gibeah, sitting under the tamarisk tree on the high place with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing around him. 7Saul said to his servants who were standing around him, “Listen now, you Benjamites! Will the son of Jesse also give every one of you fields and vineyards? Will he make you all commanders of thousands and hundreds? 8“For all of you have conspired against me so that no one informs me when my son [Jonathan] makes a covenant with the son of Jesse. None of you cares about me or informs me that my son has stirred up my servant against me to lie in ambush, as he does this day?” 9Then Doeg the Edomite, who was standing with Saul’s servants, replied, “I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech [the priest] the son of Ahitub. 10“Ahimelech inquired of the LORD for him, and gave him provisions and the sword of Goliath the Philistine.”

11Then the king sent someone to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father’s household, the priests who were at Nob; and all of them came to the king. 12Then Saul said, “Listen now, son of Ahitub.” He replied, “Here I am [at your service], my lord.” 13Saul said to him, “Why have you and the son of Jesse conspired against me, in that you have given him bread and a sword and have inquired of God for him, so he would rebel against me by lying in ambush, as he does this day?”

14Then Ahimelech answered the king, “And who among all your servants is as faithful and trustworthy as David, who is the king’s son-in-law, and who is captain over your guard [and your confidant], and is honored in your house? 15“Did I just begin to inquire of God for him today? Far be it from me! Do not let the king impute any guilt to his servant or to any of the household of my father, for your servant knows nothing at all about this entire matter.” 16But Saul said, “Be assured that you shall die, Ahimelech, you and all your father’s household (extended family).” 17And the king said to the guards who stood around him, “Turn around and kill the priests of the LORD, because their loyalty also is with David, and because they knew that he was fleeing and did not inform me.” But the servants of the king were not willing to put out their hands to attack the LORD’S priests. 18So the king said to Doeg, “You turn around and attack the priests.” And Doeg the Edomite turned and attacked the priests, and that day he killed eighty-five men who wore the [priest’s] linen ephod. 19And he struck Nob the city of the priests with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and infants; also he struck oxen and donkeys and sheep with the edge of the sword.

20But one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped and fled to David. 21Abiathar told David that Saul had murdered the LORD’S priests. 22Then David said to Abiathar, “I knew that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would certainly tell Saul. I have brought about the death of everyone in your father’s household (extended family). 23“Stay with me; do not be afraid, for he who seeks my life seeks your life, but you are safe with me.”

1 Samuel 23
David Rescues Keilah

1Then they told David, saying, “Behold, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah and are plundering (robbing) the threshing floors [of the grain].” 2So David inquired of the LORD, saying, “Shall I go and attack these Philistines?” And the Lord said to David, “Go and attack the Philistines and save Keilah.” 3But David’s men said to him, “Listen, we are afraid here in Judah. How much more then if we go to Keilah against the battle lines of the Philistines?” 4Then David inquired of the LORD again. And the LORD answered him, “Arise, go down to Keilah, for I will hand over the Philistines to you.” 5So David and his men went to Keilah and fought the Philistines; he drove away their cattle and struck them with a great slaughter. So David rescued the inhabitants of Keilah.

6When Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David at Keilah, he came down with an ephod in his hand. 7Now when Saul was informed that David had come to Keilah, Saul said, “God has handed him over to me, for he shut himself in by entering a city that has double gates and bars.” 8So Saul summoned all the people (soldiers) for war, to go down to Keilah to besiege David and his men. 9But David knew that Saul was plotting evil against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest, “Bring the ephod here.” 10Then David said, “O LORD, the God of Israel, Your servant has heard for certain that Saul intends to come to Keilah, to destroy the city on my account. 11“Will the men of Keilah hand me over to him? Will Saul come down just as Your servant has heard? O LORD, God of Israel, I pray, tell Your servant.” And the LORD said, “He will come down.” 12Then David asked, “Will the men of Keilah surrender me and my men to Saul?” The LORD said, “They will surrender you.” 13Then David and his men, about six hundred, arose and left Keilah, and they went wherever they could go. When Saul was told that David had escaped from Keilah, he gave up the pursuit. 14David stayed in the wilderness in strongholds, in the hill country of the Wilderness of Ziph. Saul searched for him every day, but God did not hand David over to him.

Saul Pursues David 15Now David became aware that Saul had come out to seek his life. David was in the Wilderness of Ziph [in the woods] at Horesh. 16And Jonathan, Saul’s son, arose and went [into the woods] to David at Horesh, and encouraged him in God. 17He said to him, “Do not be afraid; the hand of my father Saul will not find you. You will be king over Israel and I will be second in command to you; my father Saul knows this too.” 18So the two of them made a covenant before the LORD; and David stayed [in the woods] at Horesh and Jonathan went to his house.

19Then the Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah, saying, “Is David not hiding with us in strongholds of Horesh, on the hill of Hachilah, which is south of Jeshimon? 20“Now then, O king, come down [to Ziph] in accordance with all your heart’s desire to do so [and capture him]; and our part shall be to hand him over to the king.” 21Saul said, “May you be blessed by the LORD, because you have had compassion on me. 22Go now, be very persistent and investigate, and see where his haunt is and who has seen him there; for I am told he is very cunning. 23“So look, and take note of all the places where he hides and come back to me with the established facts, then I will go with you. If he is [anywhere] in the land, I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.”

24So they arose and went to Ziph ahead of Saul. Now David and his men were in the Wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah south of Jeshimon. 25Then Saul and his men went to search for him. When David was told about it, he went down to the rock and stayed [there] in the Wilderness of Maon. When Saul heard it, he pursued David in the Wilderness of Maon. 26Saul went on one side of the mountain, and David and his men on the other side of the mountain. And David was hurrying to get away from Saul, for Saul and his men were surrounding David and his men to capture them. 27But a messenger came to Saul, saying, “Hurry and come, because the Philistines have attacked the land.” 28So Saul returned from pursuing David and went to meet the Philistines; therefore they called that place the Rock of Escape. 29David went up from there and stayed in the strongholds of Engedi.

1 Samuel 24
David Spares Saul’s Life

1When Saul returned from following the Philistines, he was told, “Behold, David is in the Wilderness of Engedi.” 2Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel and went to search for David and his men in front of the Rocks of the Wild Goats. 3On the way he came to the sheepfolds where there was a cave; and Saul went in to relieve himself. Now David and his men were sitting in the cave’s innermost recesses. 4David’s men said to him, “Behold, this is the day of which the LORD said to you, ‘Behold, I will hand over your enemy to you, and you shall do to him as seems good to you.’” Then David arose [in the darkness] and stealthily cut off the hem (edge) of Saul’s robe. 5Afterward, David’s conscience bothered him because he had cut off the hem of Saul’s robe. 6He said to his men, “The LORD forbid that I should do this thing to my master, the LORD’S anointed, to put out my hand against him, since he is the anointed of the LORD.” 7So David strongly rebuked his men with these words and did not let them rise up against Saul. Saul got up, left the cave and went on his way.

8Then David also got up afterward and went out of the cave and called after Saul, saying, “My lord the king!” And when Saul looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the ground and lay himself face down. 9David said to Saul, “Why do you listen to the words of men who say, ‘David seeks to harm you?’ 10Behold, your eyes have seen today how the LORD had given you into my hand in the cave. Some told me to kill you, but I spared you; I said, ‘I will not reach out my hand against my lord, for he is the LORD’S anointed.’ 11Look, my father! Indeed, see the hem of your robe in my hand! Since I cut off the hem of your robe and did not kill you, know and understand [without question] that there is no evil or treason in my hands. I have not sinned against you, though you are lying in wait to take my life. 12May the LORD judge between me and you; and may the LORD avenge me on you; but my hand shall not be against you. 13As the proverb of the ancients says, ‘Out of the wicked comes wickedness’; but my hand shall not be against you. 14After whom has the king of Israel come out? Whom do you pursue [with three thousand men]? A dead dog, a single flea? 15“May the LORD be the judge and render judgment between me and you; and may He see and plead my cause and vindicate me by saving me from your hand.”

16When David had finished saying these words to Saul, Saul said, “Is this your voice, my son David?” Then Saul raised his voice and wept. 17He said to David, “You are more righteous and upright [in God’s eyes] than I; for you have done good to me, but I have done evil to you. 18You have declared today the good that you have done to me, for when the LORD put me into your hand, you did not kill me. 19For if a man finds his enemy, will he let him go away unharmed? So may the LORD reward you with good in return for what you have done for me this day. 20Now, behold, I know that you will certainly be king and that the kingdom of Israel will be established in your hand. 21“So now swear to me by the LORD that you will not cut off my descendants after me and that you will not destroy my name from my father’s household (extended family).” 22David gave Saul his oath; and Saul went home, but David and his men went up to the mountain stronghold.

1 Samuel 25
Samuel’s Death

1Now Samuel died; and all Israel assembled and mourned for him, and they buried him at his house in Ramah. Then David left and went down to the Wilderness of Paran.

Nabal and Abigail 2Now there was a man in Maon whose business and possessions were in Carmel; and the man was very rich. He had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats, and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel 3(now the man’s name was Nabal and his wife’s name was Abigail. She was intelligent and beautiful in appearance, but the man was harsh and evil in his dealings; he was a Calebite). 4David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep. 5So David sent ten young men; and David said to the young men, “Go up to Carmel and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name; 6and this is what you shall say, ‘Have a long life! Peace be to you, and peace to your house, and peace to all that you have. 7‘Now I have heard that you have shearers. Now your shepherds have been with us and we have not harmed them, nor were they missing anything all the time they were in Carmel. 8‘Ask your young men and they will tell you. Therefore let my young men find favor in your sight [and be well-treated], for we have come on a good (festive) day. Please, give whatever you find at hand to your servants and to your son David.’”

9When David’s young men came, they spoke to Nabal according to all these words in the name of David; then they waited. 10But Nabal answered David’s servants and said, “Who is David? And who is the son of Jesse? There are many servants today, each of whom is breaking away from his master. 11“So should I take my bread and my water and my meat that I have slaughtered for my shearers, and give it to men when I do not know where they are from?” 12So David’s young men made their way back and returned; and they came and told him everything that was said [to them by Nabal]. 13David said to his men, “Each man put on your sword.” So each man put on his sword. David also put on his sword, and about four hundred men went up behind David while two hundred stayed back with the provisions and supplies.

14But one of Nabal’s young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, “Listen, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to bless (greet) our master, and he shouted at them [in contempt]. 15But David’s men were very good to us, and we were not harmed or treated badly, nor did we miss anything as long as we were with them, when we were in the fields. 16They were a wall [of protection] to us both night and day, all the time that we were with them tending the sheep. 17“Now then, know this and consider what you should do, for evil is [already] planned against our master and against all his household; but he is such a worthless and wicked man that one cannot speak [reasonably] to him.”

Abigail Intercedes 18Then Abigail hurried and took two hundred loaves of bread, two jugs of wine, five sheep already prepared [for roasting], five measures of roasted grain, a hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and loaded them on donkeys. 19She said to her young men (servants), “Go on ahead of me; behold, I am coming after you.” But she did not tell her husband Nabal. 20It happened that as she was riding on her donkey and coming down by [way of] the hidden part of the mountain, that suddenly David and his men were coming down toward her, and she met them. 21Now David had said, “Surely in vain I have protected and guarded all that this man has in the wilderness, so that nothing was missing of all that belonged to him; and he has repaid me evil for good. 22“May God do so to the enemies of David, and more also, if by morning I leave [alive] even one male of any who belong to him.”

23When Abigail saw David, she hurried and dismounted from the donkey, and kneeled face downward before David and bowed down to the ground [in respect]. 24Kneeling at his feet she said, “My lord, let the blame and guilt be on me alone. And please let your maidservant speak to you, and listen to the words of your maidservant. 25Please do not let my lord pay attention to this worthless man, Nabal, for as his name is, so is he. Nabal (fool) is his name and foolishness (stupidity) is with him; but I your maidservant did not see my lord’s young men whom you sent.

26So now, my lord, as the LORD lives, and as your soul lives, since the LORD has prevented you from shedding blood, and from avenging yourself by your own hand, now then let your enemies and those who seek to do evil to my lord, be as [self-destructive as] Nabal. 27Now this gift, which your maidservant has brought my lord, let it be given to the young men who accompany and follow my lord. 28Please forgive the transgression of your maidservant; for the LORD will certainly make my lord a secure and enduring house, because my lord is fighting the battles of the LORD, and evil will not be found in you all your days. 29Should anyone rise up to pursue you and to seek your life, then the life of my lord will be bound in the [precious] bundle of the living with the LORD your God; but the lives of your enemies—those He will hurl out as from the center of a sling. 30And it will happen when the LORD does for my lord according to all the good that He has spoken (promised) concerning you, and appoints you ruler over Israel, 31that this [incident] will not cause grief or [bring] a troubled conscience to my lord, both by having shed blood without cause and by my lord having avenged himself. When the LORD deals well with my lord, then remember [with favor] your maidservant.”

32David said to Abigail, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who sent you to meet me this day. 33And blessed be your discretion and discernment, and blessed be you, who has kept me from bloodshed this day and from avenging myself by my own hand. 34“Nevertheless, as the LORD the God of Israel lives, who has prevented me from harming you, if you had not come quickly to meet me, most certainly by the morning light there would not have been left to Nabal so much as one male.” 35So David accepted what she had brought to him and said to her, “Go up to your house in peace. See, I have listened to you and have granted your request.”

36Then Abigail came to Nabal, and he was holding a feast in his house [for the shearers], like the feast of a king. And Nabal’s mood was joyous because he was very drunk; so she told him nothing at all until the morning light. 37But in the morning, when Nabal was sober, and his wife told him these things, his heart died within him and he became [paralyzed and helpless] like a stone. 38About ten days later, the LORD struck Nabal and he died.

David Marries Abigail 39When David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, “Blessed be the LORD, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach [suffered] at the hand of Nabal and has kept His servant from [retaliating with] evil. For the Lord has returned the wickedness of Nabal on his own head.” Then David sent word to Abigail, proposing to take her as his wife. 40When the servants of David came to Abigail at Carmel, they said to her, “David sent us to you to take you [to him] to be his wife.” 41And she stood and bowed with her face to the ground and said, “Behold, your maidservant is [ready to be] a maid to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.” 42Then Abigail quickly got up, and rode on a donkey, with five of her maidens who attended her; and she followed the messengers of David and became his wife.

43David had also taken Ahinoam of Jezreel, and they both became his wives.

44But Saul had given Michal his [younger] daughter, David’s wife, to Palti the son of Laish, who was from Gallim.

1 Samuel 26
David Again Spares Saul

1The Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah, saying, “Is David not hiding on the hill of Hachilah, east of Jeshimon?” 2So Saul arose and went down to the Wilderness of Ziph, taking with him three thousand chosen men of Israel, to search for David [there] in the wilderness of Ziph. 3Saul camped on the hill of Hachilah, which is beside the road east of Jeshimon, but David stayed in the wilderness. When he saw that Saul came into the wilderness after him, 4David sent out spies, and he learned that Saul was definitely coming. 5So David arose and went to the place where Saul had camped, and saw the spot where Saul lay, as well as Abner the son of Ner, the commander of his army; and Saul was lying inside the circle of the camp, with the army camped around him.

6Then David said to Ahimelech the Hittite and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother of Joab, “Who will go down with me to Saul in the camp?” And Abishai said, “I will go down with you.” 7So David and Abishai went to the army during the night, and there was Saul lying asleep inside the circle of the camp with his spear stuck in the ground by his head; and Abner and the people were lying around him. 8Then Abishai said to David, “God has given your enemy into your hand this day; now then, please let me strike him with the spear driving it to the ground with one stroke, and I will not strike him the second time.” 9But David said to Abishai, “Do not kill him, for who can put out his hand against the LORD’S anointed [king] and be guiltless (innocent)?” 10David also said, “As the LORD lives, most certainly the LORD will strike him [in His own time and way], or his day will come and he will die, or he will go down into battle and be carried off [dead]. 11“The LORD forbid that I would put out my hand against the LORD’S anointed; but now take the spear that is by his head and the jug of water, and let us go.” 12So David took the spear and the jug of water from beside Saul’s head, and they left, and no one saw or knew nor did anyone awaken, because they were all sound asleep, for a deep sleep from the LORD had fallen on them.

13Then David crossed over to the other side and stood on the top of the mountain at a distance, with a large area between them. 14David called to the army and to Abner the son of Ner, “Will you not answer, Abner?” Abner replied, “Who are you who calls [and disturbs] the king?” 15David said to Abner, “Are you not a [brave] man? Who is like you in Israel? Why then have you not guarded your lord the king? For one of the people came [into your camp] to kill the king your lord. 16“This thing that you have done is not good. As the LORD lives, you surely deserve to die, because you have not guarded your lord, the LORD’S anointed. And now, see where the king’s spear is, and the jug of water that was by his head.”

17Then Saul recognized David’s voice and said, “Is this your voice, my son David?” And David said, “It is my voice, my lord the king!” 18And David said, “Why is my lord pursuing his servant? For what have I done? Or what evil is in my hand? 19Now therefore, please let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If the LORD has incited you against me, let Him accept an offering [from me]; but if it is men, may they be cursed before the LORD, because they have driven me out this day to keep me from sharing in the inheritance of the LORD, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods.’ 20“Now then, do not let my blood fall to the ground away from the presence of the LORD; for the king of Israel has come out to search for a single flea, just as when one hunts a [defenseless] partridge in the mountains.”

21Then Saul said, “I have sinned. Return, my son David, for I will not harm you again because my life was precious in your sight this day. Hear me, I have played the fool and have done a very great wrong [to you].” 22David answered, “Look, here is the king’s spear! Now let one of the young men come over and get it. 23The LORD will repay each man for his righteousness and his faithfulness; for the LORD handed you over to me today, but I refused to put out my hand against the LORD’S anointed. 24“Now behold, just as your life was precious in my sight this day, so let my life be precious in the sight of the LORD, and may He rescue me from all distress.” 25Then Saul said to David, “May you be blessed, my son David; you will both accomplish much and certainly prevail.” So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.

1 Samuel 27
David Flees To The Philistines

1But David said in his heart, “Now I will die one day by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than to escape to the land of the Philistines. Then Saul will give up searching for me inside the borders of Israel, and I will escape from his hand [once and for all].” 2So David and the six hundred men who were with him arose and crossed over to Achish the son of Maoch, king of Gath. 3And David lived with Achish at Gath, he and his men, each man with his household, and David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, [who was] Nabal’s widow. 4When Saul was told that David had fled to Gath, he no longer searched for him.

5Then David said to Achish, “If I have found favor in your sight, let me be given a place [of my own] in one of the cities in the country, so that I may live there; for why should your servant live in the royal city with you?” 6Then Achish gave David [the town of] Ziklag that day. Therefore Ziklag has belonged to the kings of Judah to this day. 7The number of days that David lived in the country of the Philistines was a year and four months.

8Now David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites, the Girzites, and the Amalekites [the enemies of Israel that Joshua had failed to annihilate]; for they had inhabited the land from ancient times, as one comes to Shur even as far as the land of Egypt. 9David attacked the land and did not leave a man or a woman alive, but he took the sheep, the cattle, the donkeys, the camels, and the clothing, and returned to Achish. 10When Achish asked, “Where did you raid today?” David replied, “Against the Negev (the South country) of Judah, and against the Negev of the Jerahmeelites, and against the Negev of the Kenites.” 11David did not leave a man or a woman alive to bring news to Gath, saying [to himself], “Otherwise they will tell about us, saying, ‘This is what David has done, and this has been his practice all the time that he has lived in the country of the Philistines.’” 12Achish believed David, saying, “He has certainly become hated by his people in Israel; so he will always be my servant.”

1 Samuel 28
Saul And The Spirit Medium

1In those days the Philistines gathered their forces for war to fight against Israel. Achish said to David, “Understand for certain that you and your men will go out with me to battle.” 2David said to Achish, “All right, you shall know what your servant can do.” So Achish said to David, “Therefore I will make you my bodyguard for life.”

3Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried him in Ramah, his own city. And Saul had removed the mediums and the spiritists (soothsayers) from the land. 4The Philistines assembled and came and camped at Shunem; and Saul gathered all the Israelites and they camped at Gilboa. 5When Saul saw the Philistine army, he was afraid and badly shaken. 6So Saul inquired of the LORD, but the LORD did not answer him, either by dreams or by Urim [used like lots by the priest to determine the will of God] or by prophets. 7Then Saul said to his servants, “Find for me a woman who is a medium [between the living and the dead], so that I may go to her and ask her advice.” His servants said to him, “There is a woman who is a medium at En-dor.”

8So Saul disguised himself by wearing different clothes, and he left with two men, and they came to the woman at night. He said to her, “Conjure up for me, please, and bring up [from the dead] for me [the spirit] whom I shall name to you.” 9But the woman said to him, “See here, you know what Saul has done, how he has cut off (eliminated) those who are mediums and spiritists from the land. So why are you laying a trap for my life, to cause my death?” 10Then Saul swore [an oath] to her by the LORD, saying, “As the LORD lives, no punishment shall come upon you for this.” 11So the woman said, “Whom shall I bring up for you?” He said, “Bring up Samuel for me.” 12When the woman saw Samuel, she screamed with a loud voice; and she said to Saul, “Why have you deceived me? You are Saul!” 13The king said to her, “Do not be afraid; but [tell me] what do you see?” The woman said to Saul, “I see a divine [superhuman] being coming up from the earth.” 14He said to her, “What is his appearance?” And she said, “An old man is coming up, wrapped in a robe.” Then Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground and paid respect [to him].

15Then Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed me by bringing me up?” Saul answered, “I am greatly distressed; for the Philistines are making war against me, and God has left me and no longer answers me, either through prophets or by dreams; therefore I have called you to make known to me what I should do.” 16Samuel said, “Why then do you ask me, since the LORD has left you and has become your enemy? 17The LORD has done [to you] just as He said through me [when I was with you]; for the LORD has torn the kingdom out of your hand and given it to your neighbor, to David. 18Because you did not obey the voice of the LORD and did not execute His fierce wrath on Amalek, therefore the LORD has done this thing to you this day. 19“Moreover, the LORD will also put Israel along with you into the hands of the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me [among the dead]. Indeed, the LORD will put the army of Israel into the hands of the Philistines.”

20Then Saul immediately fell full length on the earth [floor of the medium’s house], and was very afraid because of Samuel’s words; and he was thoroughly exhausted because he had not eaten all day and all night. 21The woman came to Saul and saw that he was greatly troubled, and she said to him, “Look, your maidservant has obeyed you, and I have taken my life in my hand and have listened to everything you said to me. 22“So now, please listen to the voice of your maidservant, and let me set a piece of bread before you, and eat, so that you may have strength when you go on your way.” 23But he refused and said, “I will not eat.” But his servants together with the woman urged him, and he [finally] listened to them. So he got up from the ground and sat on the bed. 24The woman had a fattened calf in the house; she quickly killed it, and took flour, kneaded it and baked unleavened bread. 25She brought it before Saul and his servants, and they ate. Then they got up and went away that night.

1 Samuel 29
The Philistines Mistrust David

1Now the Philistines gathered all their forces at Aphek, while Israel camped by the spring in Jezreel. 2As the Philistine lords (governors) were proceeding on [marching] by hundreds and by thousands, and David and his men were proceeding on in the rear with Achish [the king of Gath], 3the Philistine commanders [having noticed David] said, “What are these Hebrews doing here?” Achish said to the Philistine commanders, “Is this not David, the servant of Saul king of Israel, who has been with me these days and years, and I have found no fault in him from the day he deserted to me to this day?” 4But the Philistine commanders were angry with Achish and they said to him, “Make this man return, so that he may go back to his place where you have assigned him, and do not let him go down to battle with us, or in the battle he may [turn and] become our adversary. For how could David reconcile himself to his lord [Saul]? Would it not be with the heads of these [Philistine] men? 5“Is this not David, of whom they used to sing in dances,
‘Saul killed his thousands,
And David his ten thousands’?”

6Then Achish called David and said to him, “As the LORD lives, you have been upright (righteous), and your behavior in the army is pleasing in my sight. For from the day you came to me to this day I have found no evil in you. Nevertheless, the [Philistine] lords do not approve of you. 7“So return now and go in peace [to your place], so that you do not displease the Philistine lords.” 8David said to Achish, “But what have I done? What have you found in your servant from the day when I [first] came before you to this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?” 9Achish answered David, “I know that you are blameless in my sight, like an angel of God; nevertheless the commanders of the Philistines have said, ‘He must not go up with us to the battle.’ 10“So now, get up early in the morning with your master’s servants who have come with you, and as soon as you are up in the morning and have light, leave.” 11So David and his men got up early to leave in the morning, to return to the land of the Philistines. But the Philistines went up to Jezreel [to fight against Israel].

1 Samuel 30
David’s Victory Over The Amalekites

1Now it happened when David and his men came [home] to Ziklag on the third day, [they found] that the Amalekites had made a raid on the Negev (the South country) and on Ziklag, and had overthrown Ziklag and burned it with fire; 2and they had taken captive the women [and all] who were there, both small and great. They killed no one, but carried them off [to be used as slaves] and went on their way. 3When David and his men came to the town, it was burned, and their wives and their sons and their daughters had been taken captive. 4Then David and the people who were with him raised their voices and wept until they were too exhausted to weep [any longer]. 5Now David’s two wives had been captured, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess and Abigail the widow of Nabal the Carmelite. 6Further, David was greatly distressed because the people spoke of stoning him, for all of them were embittered, each man for his sons and daughters. But David felt strengthened and encouraged in the LORD his God.

7David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech’s son, “Please bring me the ephod.” So Abiathar brought him the ephod. 8David inquired of the LORD, saying, “Shall I pursue this band [of raiders]? Will I overtake them?” And He answered him, “Pursue, for you will certainly overtake them, and you will certainly rescue [the captives].” 9So David went, he and the six hundred men who were with him, and came to the brook Besor; there those [who could not continue] remained behind. 10But David pursued [the Amalekites], he and four hundred men, for two hundred who were too exhausted to cross the brook Besor stayed behind.

11They found an Egyptian [who had collapsed] in the field and brought him to David, and gave him bread and he ate, and they gave him water to drink, 12and they gave him a piece of a fig cake and two clusters of raisins; and when he had eaten, his energy returned, for he had not eaten bread or had any water to drink for three days and three nights. 13David said to him, “To whom do you belong, and where are you from?” He said, “I am a young man from Egypt, a servant of an Amalekite; and my master abandoned me [as useless] when I fell sick three days ago. 14“We made a raid on the Negev of the Cherethites, and on that which belongs to Judah, and on the Negev of Caleb, and we burned Ziklag with fire.” 15Then David said to him, “Will you take me down to this band [of raiders]?” And he said, “Swear to me by God that you will not kill me or turn me over to the hand of my master, and I will bring you down to this band.”

16When he brought David down, the Amalekites had disbanded and spread over all the land, eating and drinking and dancing because of all the great spoil they had taken from the land of the Philistines and from the land of Judah. 17Then David [and his men] struck them down [in battle] from twilight until the evening of the next day; and not a man of them escaped, except four hundred young men who rode camels and fled. 18So David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken, and rescued his two wives. 19Nothing of theirs was missing whether small or great, sons or daughters, spoil or anything that had been taken; David recovered it all. 20So David captured all the flocks and herds [which the enemy had], and [the people] drove those animals before him and said, “This is David’s spoil.”

The Spoils Are Divided 21David came to the two hundred men who were so exhausted that they could not follow him and had been left at the brook Besor [with the provisions]. They went out to meet David and the people with him, and when he approached the people, he greeted them. 22Then all the wicked and worthless men among those who went with David said, “Because they did not go with us, we will give them none of the spoil that we have recovered, except that each man may take his wife and children away and leave.” 23David said, “You must not do so, my brothers, with what the LORD has given us. He has kept us safe and has handed over to us the band [of Amalekites] that came against us. 24“And who will listen to you in regard to this matter? For as is the share of him who goes down into the battle, so shall his share be who stays by the provisions and supplies; they shall share alike.” 25So from that day forward he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel to this day.

26When David came to Ziklag, he sent part of the spoil to the elders of Judah, his friends, saying, “Here is a blessing (gift) for you from the spoil of the enemies of the LORD: 27For those in Bethel, Ramoth of the Negev, Jattir, 28Aroer, Siphmoth, Eshtemoa, 29Racal, the cities of the Jerahmeelites, the cities of the Kenites, 30Hormah, Bor-ashan, Athach, 31Hebron, and for [those elders in] all the places where David himself and his men were accustomed to go.”

1 Samuel 31
Saul And His Sons Slain

1Now the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before them and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. 2The Philistines overtook Saul and his sons; and they killed Jonathan and Abinadab and Malchi-shua, Saul’s sons. 3The battle went heavily against Saul, and the archers hit him; and he was severely wounded by the archers. 4Saul said to his armor bearer, “Draw your sword and pierce me through with it, otherwise these uncircumcised [Philistines] will come and pierce me through and abuse and mock me.” But his armor bearer would not, because he was terrified [of doing such a thing]. So Saul took his sword and fell on it. 5When his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell on his sword and died with him. 6So Saul, his three sons, his armor bearer, and all his men died together on that day.

7When the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley [of Jezreel], and those who were beyond the Jordan, saw that the other men of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned the cities and fled; then the Philistines came and lived in them.

8The next day, when the Philistines came to plunder the dead, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 9So they cut off Saul’s head and stripped off his weapons and armor and sent them throughout the land of the Philistines, to bring the good news to the house of their idols and to the people. 10And they put Saul’s weapons and armor in the temple of the Ashtaroth (female goddesses), and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan. 11When the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul, 12all the brave men stood and walked all night, and they took the bodies of Saul and his sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and they came to Jabesh and cremated them there. 13They took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree at Jabesh, and fasted [as a sign of mourning and respect] for seven days.

2 Samuel 1
David Learns Of Saul’s Death

1Now it happened after the death of Saul, when David had returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, that he stayed two days in Ziklag. 2On the third day a man came [unexpectedly] from Saul’s camp with his clothes torn and dust on his head [as in mourning]. When he came to David, he bowed to the ground and lay himself face down [in an act of great respect and submission]. 3Then David asked him, “Where do you come from?” He said, “I have escaped from the camp of Israel.” 4David said to him, “How did it go? Please tell me.” He answered, “The people have fled from the battle. Also, many of the people have fallen and are dead; Saul and Jonathan his son are also dead.” 5So David said to the young man who informed him, “How do you know Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?” 6And the young man who told him explained, “By chance I happened to be on Mount Gilboa, and there was Saul leaning on his spear, and the chariots and horsemen [of the Philistines] were close behind him. 7When he turned to look behind him, he saw me, and called to me. And I answered, ‘Here I am.’ 8He asked me, ‘Who are you?’ I answered him, ‘I am an Amalekite.’ 9He said to me, ‘Stand up facing me and kill me, for [terrible] agony has come over me, yet I still live [and I will be taken alive].’ 10“So I stood facing him and killed him, because I knew that he could not live after he had fallen. Then I took the crown which was on his head and the band which was on his arm, and I have brought them here to my lord.”

11Then David grasped his own clothes and tore them [in mourning]; so did all the men who were with him. 12They mourned and wept and fasted until evening for Saul and Jonathan his son, and for the LORD’S people and the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword [in battle]. 13David said to the young man who informed him, “Where are you from?” He answered, “I am the son of a foreigner (resident alien, sojourner), an Amalekite.” 14David said to him, “How is it that you were not afraid to put out your hand to destroy the LORD’S anointed?” 15David called one of the young men and said, “Go, execute him.” So he struck the Amalekite and he died. 16David said to the [fallen] man, “Your blood is on your own head, for your own mouth has testified against you, saying, ‘I have killed the LORD’S anointed.’”

David’s Dirge for Saul and Jonathan 17Then David sang this dirge (funeral song) over Saul and his son Jonathan, 18and he told them to teach the sons of Judah, the song of the bow. Behold, it is written in the Book of Jashar:
19“Your glory and splendor, O Israel, is slain upon your high places!
How the mighty have fallen!
20“Tell it not in Gath,
Proclaim it not in the streets of Ashkelon,
Or the daughters of the Philistines will rejoice,
The daughters of the uncircumcised (pagans) will exult.
21“O mountains of Gilboa,
Let not dew or rain be upon you, nor fields with offerings;
For there the shield of the mighty was defiled,
The shield of Saul, [dry, cracked] not anointed with oil.
22“From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty,
The bow of Jonathan did not turn back,
And the sword of Saul did not return empty.
23“Saul and Jonathan, beloved and lovely and friends in their lives,
And in their death they were not separated;
They were swifter than eagles,
They were stronger than lions.
24“O daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
Who clothed you luxuriously in scarlet,
Who put ornaments of gold on your apparel.
25“How the mighty have fallen in the midst of the battle!
Jonathan lies slain upon your high places.
26“I am distressed for you, my brother Jonathan;
You have been a good friend to me.
Your love toward me was more wonderful
Than the love of women.
27“How the mighty have fallen,
And the weapons of war have perished!”

2 Samuel 2
David Made King Over Judah

1So it happened after this that David inquired of the LORD, saying, “Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah?” And the LORD said to him, “Go up.” David asked, “Where shall I go?” And He said, “To Hebron.” 2So David went up there [to Hebron] with his two wives also, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel [in Judah]. 3And David brought up his men who were with him, each one with his household; and they lived in the cities of Hebron. 4Then the men of Judah came and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah.

Then they told David, “It was the men of Jabesh-gilead who buried Saul.” 5So David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh-gilead, and said to them, “May you be blessed by the LORD because you showed this graciousness and loyalty to Saul your lord (king), and buried him. 6Now may the LORD show lovingkindness and truth and faithfulness to you. I too will show this goodness to you, because you have done this thing. 7“So now, let your hands be strong and be valiant; for your lord Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah has anointed me king over them.”

Ish-bosheth Made King over Israel 8Now [Saul’s cousin] Abner the son of Ner, commander of Saul’s army, had taken Ish-bosheth the son of Saul and brought him over to Mahanaim. 9He made him king over Gilead, over the Ashurites, over Jezreel, over Ephraim, over Benjamin, even over all Israel [except Judah]. 10Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, was forty years old when he became king over Israel, and he reigned for two years. But the house of Judah followed David. 11And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.

Civil War 12Now Abner the son of Ner and the servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon. 13Joab [David’s nephew] the son of Zeruiah and the servants of David also went out and met them by the pool of Gibeon. They sat down, with one group on one side of the pool and the other group on the other side of the pool. 14Then Abner said to Joab, “Let the young men now stand and have a contest before us.” And Joab said, “Let them stand.” 15So they stood up and went over by number, twelve for Benjamin and Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David. 16Each one of them seized his opponent by the head and thrust his sword into his opponents side; so they fell down together. Therefore that place was called Helkath-hazzurim [that is, the Field of Sides], which is in Gibeon. 17There was a very fierce battle that day, and Abner and the men of Israel were beaten before the servants of David.

18Three sons of Zeruiah [the half sister of David] were there: Joab, Abishai, and Asahel. Now Asahel was as light and swift-footed as one of the [wild] gazelles in the field. 19Asahel pursued Abner and did not turn to the right or to the left as he followed him. 20Then Abner looked behind him and said, “Is that you, Asahel?” He answered, “It is I.” 21So Abner said to him, “Turn to your right or to your left, and grab one of the young men and take his armor for yourself.” But Asahel was not willing to turn away from pursuing Abner. 22Abner repeated again, “Turn away from following me. Why should I have to strike you to the ground? How would I be able to face Joab your brother [and look him in the eye]?” 23But Asahel refused to turn away; so Abner struck him in the abdomen with the butt end of his spear, and the spear came out his back; and he fell there and died on that spot. And it came about that everyone who came to the place where Asahel fell and died, stood still [and reflected].

24But Joab and Abishai [Asahel’s brothers] pursued Abner. When the sun was going down, they came to the hill of Ammah, which is in front of Giah on the way to the wilderness of Gibeon. 25And the sons of [the tribe of] Benjamin gathered together behind Abner and became one troop, and took their stand on the top of a hill. 26Then Abner called to Joab, “Must the sword devour forever? Do you not know that it will be bitter in the end? How long [will it be] before you tell the people to stop pursuing their brothers?” 27Joab said, “As God lives, if you had not spoken, then the people certainly would have stopped pursuing their brothers in the morning.” 28So Joab blew the trumpet; and all the people halted and no longer pursued Israel, nor did they fight anymore. 29Then Abner and his men went through the Arabah (desert region) all that night, crossed the Jordan, went through Bithron and walked the whole morning and came to Mahanaim [where Ish-bosheth ruled Israel].

30Joab returned from pursuing Abner; and when he had gathered all the people together, nineteen of David’s servants were missing, besides Asahel. 31But the servants of David had struck down many of Benjamin and Abner’s men; so that three hundred and sixty men died. 32And they picked up [the body of] Asahel and buried him in the tomb of his father in Bethlehem. Then Joab and his men walked all night and they arrived in Hebron at daybreak.

2 Samuel 3
The House Of David Strengthened

1There was a long war between the house of Saul and the house of David; but David grew steadily stronger, while the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker [to the point of being powerless].

2Sons were born to David in Hebron: his firstborn was Amnon, by Ahinoam of Jezreel; 3his second, Chileab, by Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel; the third, Absalom the son of [his wife] Maacah, daughter of Talmai the king of Geshur; 4the fourth, Adonijah the son of [his wife] Haggith; the fifth, Shephatiah the son of [his wife] Abital; 5and the sixth, Ithream, by David’s wife Eglah. These [sons] were born to David in Hebron.

Abner Joins David 6Now while war continued between the houses of Saul and David, Abner was proving himself strong in the house of Saul. 7Now Saul had a concubine whose name was Rizpah the daughter of Aiah; and Ish-bosheth said to Abner, “Why have you gone in to my father’s concubine?” 8Then Abner was very angry at the words of Ish-bosheth, and he said, “Am I a dog’s head [a despicable traitor] that belongs to Judah? Today I show loyalty and kindness to the house of Saul your father, to his brothers and his friends, by not having you handed over to David; and yet you charge me today with guilt concerning this woman. 9May God do so to Abner, and more also, if I do not do for David just as the LORD has sworn to him, 10to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul, and establish the throne of David over Israel and Judah from Dan [in the north] to Beersheba [in the south].” 11And Ish-bosheth could not say another word to Abner, because he was afraid of him.

12Then Abner sent messengers to David [who was] in his place [at Hebron], saying, “Whose is the land? Make your covenant (treaty) with me, and behold, my hand shall be with you to bring all Israel over to you.” 13David said, “Good! I will make a covenant (treaty) with you, but I require one thing of you: you shall not see my face unless you first bring Michal, Saul’s daughter, when you come to see me.” 14So David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, saying, “Give me my wife Michal, to whom I was betrothed for [the price of] a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.” 15So Ish-bosheth sent and took her from her husband, from Paltiel the son of Laish [to whom Saul had given her]. 16But her husband went with her, weeping continually behind her as far as Bahurim. Then Abner told him, “Go, return.” And he did so.

17Abner talked with the elders (tribal leaders) of Israel, saying, “In times past you were seeking for David to be king over you. 18“Now then, do it [and make him king]! For the LORD has spoken of David, saying, ‘By the hand of My servant David I will save My people Israel from the hand of the Philistines and the hand of all their enemies.’” 19Abner also spoke to [the men of] Benjamin. Then he also went to tell David at Hebron everything that seemed good to Israel and to the entire house of Benjamin.

20So Abner came to David at Hebron, and [brought] twenty men along with him. And David prepared a feast for Abner and the men with him. 21Abner said to David, “Let me stand up and go, and gather all Israel to my lord the king, so that they may make a covenant (treaty) with you, and that you may reign over all that your soul desires.” So David sent Abner away, and he went in peace.

22Then the servants of David came with Joab from a raid and brought a great quantity of spoil with them; but Abner was not with David at Hebron, because David had sent him away, and he had gone in peace. 23When Joab and all the army that was with him arrived, they told Joab, “Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he has sent him away, and he has gone in peace.” 24Then Joab came to the king and said, “What have you done? Behold, Abner came to you; why did you send him away, so that he is already gone? 25“You know Abner the son of Ner, that he [only] came to deceive you [with flattering words] and to learn of your going out and coming in, and to find out what you are doing.”

Joab Murders Abner 26When Joab left David, he sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from the well of Sirah; but David knew nothing [about Joab’s action]. 27So when Abner returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside to the middle of the gate to speak to him privately, and there he struck Abner in the abdomen so that he died, to avenge the blood of Asahel, Joab’s brother. 28Afterward, when David heard of it, he said, “I and my kingdom are forever innocent before the LORD of the blood of Abner the son of Ner. 29“Let the guilt fall on the head of Joab and on all his father’s house (family); and may there never disappear from the house of Joab one who suffers with a discharge or one who is a leper or one who walks with a crutch [being unfit for war], or one who falls by the sword, or one who lacks food.” 30So Joab and Abishai his brother murdered Abner because he had killed their brother Asahel in the battle at Gibeon.

David Mourns Abner 31Then David said to Joab and to all the people with him, “Tear your clothes, put on sackcloth, and mourn before Abner.” And King David walked behind the bier. 32They buried Abner in Hebron; and the king raised his voice and wept at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept. 33And the king sang a dirge (funeral song) over Abner and said,
“Should Abner [the great warrior] die as a fool dies?
34“Your hands were not bound, nor your feet put in fetters;
As a man falls before the wicked, so you have fallen.”
And all the people wept again over him. 35All the people came to urge David to eat food while it was still day; but David took an oath, saying, “May God do so to me, and more also, if I taste bread or anything else before the sun sets.” 36And all the people took notice of it and it pleased them, just as everything that the king did pleased all the people. 37So all the people and all Israel understood that day that it had not been the will of the king to put Abner the son of Ner to death. 38Then the king said to his servants, “Do you not know that a prince and a great man has fallen this day in Israel? 39“Today I am weak, though anointed king; these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too difficult for me. May the LORD repay the evildoer [Joab] in accordance with his wickedness!”

2 Samuel 4
Ish-Bosheth Murdered

1When Saul’s son Ish-bosheth [king of Israel], heard that Abner had died in Hebron, he lost courage, and all Israel was horrified. 2Saul’s son had two men who were commanders of [raiding] bands [of soldiers]. One was named Baanah and the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite of the sons (tribe) of Benjamin (for Beeroth is also considered part of [the tribe of] Benjamin, 3and the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and have been resident aliens there to this day).

4Jonathan, Saul’s son, had a son whose feet were crippled. He was five years old when the news [of the deaths] of Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreel. And the boy’s nurse picked him up and fled; but it happened that while she was hurrying to flee, he fell and became lame. His name was Mephibosheth.

5So the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, left and came to the house of Ish-bosheth in the heat of the day while he was taking his midday rest. 6They came into the interior of the house as if to get wheat [for the soldiers], and they struck him in the stomach. Then Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped [unnoticed]. 7Now when they entered the house he was lying on his bed in his bedroom. They [not only] struck and killed him, [but] they also beheaded him. Then they took his head and traveled all night by way of the Arabah. 8They brought the head of Ish-bosheth to David at Hebron, and said to the king, “Look, the head of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, your enemy, who sought your life; thus the LORD has granted my lord the king vengeance this day on Saul and on his descendants.”

9David replied to Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said to them, “As the LORD lives, who has redeemed my life from every adversity, 10when a man told me, ‘Behold, Saul is dead,’ thinking that he was bringing good news, I seized and killed him in Ziklag, to reward him for his news. 11“How much more, when wicked men have killed a righteous and just man in his own house on his bed, shall I not require his blood from your hand and remove you from the earth?” 12So David commanded his young men, and they killed them and cut off their hands and feet and hung them beside the pool in Hebron. But they took Ish-bosheth’s head and buried it in Hebron in the tomb of Abner [his relative].

2 Samuel 5
David King Over All Israel

1Then all the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebron and said, “Behold, we are your bone and your flesh. 2“In times past, when Saul was king over us, it was you who led Israel out [to war] and brought Israel in [from battle]. And the LORD told you, ‘You shall shepherd My people Israel and be ruler over them.’” 3So all the elders (tribal leaders) of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and King David made a covenant with them at Hebron before the LORD; and they anointed him king over Israel. 4David was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned forty years. 5In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.

6Now the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, who said to David, “You shall not enter here, for the blind and the lame [even the weakest among us] will turn you away”; they thought, “David cannot come in here [because the walls are impenetrable].” 7Nevertheless, David captured the stronghold (fortress) of Zion, that is, the City of David. 8Then David said on that day, “Whoever strikes the Jebusites, let him go up through the [underground] water shaft to strike the lame and the blind, who are detested by David’s soul [because of their arrogance].” So [for that reason] they say, “The blind or the lame (Jebusites) shall not come into the [royal] house [of Israel].” 9So David lived in the stronghold and called it the City of David. And he built all around [the surrounding area] from the Millo [fortification] and inward. 10David became greater and greater, for the LORD, the God of hosts (armies), was with him.

11Now Hiram the king of Tyre sent messengers to David with cedar trees, carpenters, and stonemasons; and they built a house (palace) for David. 12And David knew that the LORD had established him as king over Israel, and that He had exalted his kingdom for His people Israel’s sake.

13David took more concubines and wives from Jerusalem, after he came from Hebron; and more sons and daughters were born to him. 14And these are the names of those who were born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 15Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia, 16Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.

War with the Philistines 17When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to look for him, but he heard about it and went down to the stronghold. 18Now the Philistines had come and spread out [for battle] in the Valley of Rephaim. 19David inquired of the LORD, saying, “Shall I go up against the Philistines? Will You hand them over to me?” And the LORD said to David, “Go up, for I will certainly hand them over to you.” 20So David came to Baal-perazim, and he defeated them there, and said, “The LORD has broken through my enemies before me, like a breakthrough of water.” So he named that place Baal-perazim (master of breakthroughs). 21The Philistines abandoned their [pagan] idols there, so David and his men took them away [to be burned].

22The Philistines came up once again and spread out in the Valley of Rephaim. 23When David inquired of the LORD, He said, “You shall not go up, but circle around behind them and come at them in front of the balsam trees. 24“And when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, then you shall pay attention and act promptly, for at that time the LORD will have gone out before you to strike the army of the Philistines.” 25David did just as the LORD had commanded him, and struck down the Philistines from Geba as far as Gezer.

2 Samuel 6
Peril In Moving The Ark

1Again David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand. 2And David arose and went with all those who were with him to Baale-judah [Kiriath-jearim], to bring up from there [to Jerusalem] the ark of God which is called by the Name—the very Name of the LORD of hosts, who dwells enthroned above the cherubim. 3They placed the ark of God on a new cart and brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill; and Uzzah and Ahio, sons of Abinadab, were leading the new cart. 4So they brought it with the ark of God from the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill; and Ahio was walking in front of the ark. 5Meanwhile, David and all the house of Israel were celebrating and dancing before the LORD with all kinds of instruments made of fir or cypress wood, with lyres, harps, tambourines, castanets, and cymbals.

6When they came to Nacon’s threshing floor, Uzzah reached out [with his hand] to the ark of God and took hold of it, because the oxen [stumbled and] nearly overturned it. 7And the anger of the LORD burned against Uzzah, and God struck him there for his irreverence; and he died there by the ark of God. 8David became angry and grieved and offended because of the LORD’S outburst against Uzzah, and that place has been called Perez-uzzah (outburst against Uzzah) to this day. 9So David was afraid of the LORD that day; and he said, “How can the ark of the LORD come to me?” 10David was unwilling to move the ark of the LORD into the City of David with him; instead he took it aside to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 11So the ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite for three months, and the LORD blessed Obed-edom and all his household (family).

The Ark Is Brought to Jerusalem 12Now King David was told, “The LORD has blessed the house of Obed-edom and all that belongs to him, because of the ark of God.” So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the City of David with rejoicing and gladness. 13And when those who were carrying the ark of the LORD [by its poles] had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fatling. 14And David was dancing before the LORD with great enthusiasm, and David was wearing a linen ephod [a priest’s upper garment]. 15So David and all the house of Israel were bringing the ark of the LORD up [to the City of David] with shouts [of joy] and with the sound of the trumpet.

16Then, as the ark of the LORD came into the City of David, Michal, Saul’s daughter [David’s wife], looked down from the window above and saw King David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she felt contempt for him in her heart [because she thought him undignified].

17They brought in the ark of the LORD and set it in its place inside the tent which David had pitched for it; and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD. 18When David had finished offering the burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts (armies), 19and distributed to all the people, the entire multitude of Israel, both to men and women, to each a [ring-shaped] loaf of bread, a cake of dates, and a cake of raisins. Then all the people departed, each to his house.

20Then David returned to bless his household. But [his wife] Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David and said, “How glorious and distinguished was the king of Israel today, who uncovered himself and stripped [off his kingly robes] in the eyes of his servants’ maids like one of the riffraff who shamelessly uncovers himself!” 21So David said to Michal, “It was before the LORD [that I did this], who chose me above your father and all his house, to appoint me as ruler over Israel, the people of the LORD. Therefore I will celebrate [in pure enjoyment] before the LORD. 22“Yet I will demean myself even more than this, and will be humbled (abased) in my own sight [and yours, as I please], but by the maids whom you mentioned, by them I shall be held in honor.” 23Michal the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of her death.

2 Samuel 7
David Plans To Build A Temple

1When King David lived in his house (palace) and the LORD had given him rest from all his surrounding enemies, 2the king said to Nathan the prophet, “See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells within tent curtains.” 3And Nathan said to the king, “Go, do everything that is in your heart, for the LORD is with you.”

4But it happened that night that the word of the LORD came to Nathan, saying, 5“Go and tell My servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD, “Should you be the one to build Me a house in which to dwell? 6For I have not dwelt in a house since the day I brought the sons (descendants) of Israel up from Egypt, even to this day; but I have been moving about in a tent, even in a tabernacle. 7“Wherever I have gone with all the Israelites, did I speak a word to any from the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to shepherd My people Israel, asking, ‘Why have you not built Me a house of cedar?’”’ God’s Covenant with David 8So now, say this to My servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts, I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, to be ruler over My people Israel. 9I have been with you wherever you have gone, and have cut off all your enemies from before you; and I will make you a great name, like that of the great men of the earth. 10I will appoint a place for My people Israel and will plant them, so that they may live in a place of their own and not be disturbed again. The wicked will not afflict them again, as formerly, 11even from the day that I appointed judges over My people Israel; and I will give you rest from all your enemies. The LORD also declares to you that He will make a house (royal dynasty) for you. 12When your days are fulfilled and you lie down [in death] with your fathers (ancestors), I will raise up your descendant after you, who shall be born to you, and I will establish his kingdom. 13He [is the one who] shall build a house for My Name and My Presence, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever. 14I will be his Father, and he shall be My son. When he commits iniquity (wrongdoing), I will discipline him with the rod of men and with the strokes of the sons of man. 15But My lovingkindness and mercy will not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I removed from before you. 16“Your house (royal dynasty) and your kingdom will endure forever before Me; your throne will be established forever.”’” 17Nathan spoke to David in accordance with all these words and all of this vision.

David’s Prayer 18Then King David went in and sat [in prayer] before the LORD, and said, “Who am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my house (family), that You have brought me this far? 19Yet this was very insignificant in Your eyes, O Lord GOD, for You have spoken also of Your servant’s house (royal dynasty) in the distant future. And this is the law and custom of man, O Lord GOD. 20What more can David say to You? For You know (acknowledge, choose) Your servant, O Lord GOD. 21Because of Your word (promise), and in accordance with Your own heart, You have done all these great and astounding things to let Your servant know (understand). 22Therefore You are great, O Lord GOD; for there is none like You, and there is no God besides You, according to all that we have heard with our ears. 23What one nation on earth is like Your people Israel, whom God went to redeem for Himself as a people and to make a name for Himself, and to do great and awesome things for Yourself and for Your land, before Your people whom You have redeemed for Yourself from Egypt, from nations and their gods? 24You established for Yourself Your people Israel as Your people forever, and You, O LORD, have become their God. 25Now, O LORD God, confirm forever the word [of the covenant] that You have spoken in regard to Your servant and his house (royal dynasty); and do just as You have spoken, 26so that Your Name may be magnified forever, saying, ‘The LORD of hosts (armies) is God over Israel;’ and may the house (royal dynasty) of Your servant David be established before You. 27For You, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, have revealed this to Your servant, saying, ‘I will build you a house (royal dynasty).’ For that reason Your servant has found courage to pray this prayer to You. 28And now, O Lord GOD, You are God, and Your words are truth, and You have promised this good thing to Your servant. 29“Therefore now, may it please You to bless the house (royal dynasty) of Your servant, so that it may continue forever before You; for You, O Lord GOD, have spoken it, and with Your blessing may the house of Your servant be blessed forever.”

2 Samuel 8
David’s Triumphs

1Now it came about after this that David defeated the Philistines and subdued (humbled) them, and he took control of Metheg-ammah [the main city] from the hand of the Philistines.

2He defeated Moab, and measured them with a length of rope, making them lie down on the ground; he measured two lengths to [choose those to] put to death, and one full length to [choose those to] be kept alive. And the [surviving] Moabites became servants to David, bringing tribute.

3Then David defeated Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to restore his power at the River [Euphrates]. 4David captured from him 1,700 horsemen and 20,000 foot soldiers. David also hamstrung all the chariot horses (making them lame), but reserved enough of them for a hundred chariots. 5When the Arameans (Syrians) of Damascus came to help Hadadezer, king of Zobah, David struck down 22,000 Arameans. 6Then David put garrisons among the Arameans in Damascus, and the Arameans became his servants and brought tribute. The LORD helped David wherever he went. 7David took the shields of gold that were carried by the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. 8And from Betah and Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, King David took an immense quantity of bronze.

9When Toi king of Hamath heard about David’s defeat of all the forces of Hadadezer, 10Toi sent Joram his son to King David to greet and congratulate him for his battle and defeat of Hadadezer; for Hadadezer had been at war with Toi. Joram brought with him articles of silver, gold, and bronze [as gifts]. 11King David also dedicated these [gifts] to the LORD, along with the silver and gold that he had dedicated from all the nations which he subdued: 12from Aram (Syria), Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and Amalek, and from the spoil of Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king of Zobah.

13So David made a name for himself when he returned from killing 18,000 Arameans (Syrians) in the Valley of Salt. 14He put garrisons in Edom; in all Edom he put garrisons, and all the Edomites became servants to David. And the LORD helped him wherever he went.

15So David reigned over all Israel, and continued to administer justice and righteousness for all his people. 16Joab the son of Zeruiah was [commander] over the army; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder (secretary); 17Zadok the son of Ahitub and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar were the [chief] priests, and Seraiah was the scribe; 18Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was [head] over both the Cherethites and Pelethites [the king’s bodyguards]; and David’s sons were chief [confidential] advisers (officials) [to the king].

2 Samuel 9
David’s Kindness To Mephibosheth

1And David said, “Is there still anyone left of the house (family) of Saul to whom I may show kindness for Jonathan’s sake?” 2There was a servant of the house of Saul whose name was Ziba, so they called him to David. And the king said to him, “Are you Ziba?” He said, “I am your servant.” 3And the king said, “Is there no longer anyone left of the house (family) of Saul to whom I may show the goodness and graciousness of God?” Ziba replied to the king, “There is still a son of Jonathan, [one] whose feet are crippled.” 4So the king said to him, “Where is he?” And Ziba replied to the king, “He is in the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, in Lo-debar.” 5Then King David sent word and had him brought from the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, from Lo-debar. 6Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David and fell face down and lay himself down [in respect]. David said, “Mephibosheth.” And he answered, “Here is your servant!” 7David said to him, “Do not be afraid, for I will certainly show you kindness for the sake of your father Jonathan, and will restore to you all the land of your grandfather Saul; and you shall always eat at my table.” 8Again Mephibosheth lay himself face down and said, “What is your servant, that you would be concerned for a dead dog like me?”

9Then the king summoned Ziba, Saul’s servant, and said to him, “I have given your master’s grandson everything that belonged to Saul and to all his house (family). 10“You and your sons and your servants shall cultivate the land for him, and you shall bring in the produce, so that your master’s grandson may have food to eat; but Mephibosheth, your master’s grandson, shall always eat at my table.” Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants. 11Then Ziba said to the king, “Your servant will do according to everything that my lord the king commands.” So Mephibosheth ate at David’s table as one of the king’s sons. 12Mephibosheth had a young son whose name was Mica. And all who lived in Ziba’s house were servants to Mephibosheth. 13So Mephibosheth lived in Jerusalem, for he always ate at the king’s table. And he was lame in both feet.

2 Samuel 10
Ammon And Aram Defeated

1Now it happened later that [Nahash] the king of the Ammonites died, and his son Hanun became king in his place. 2Then David said, “I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, just as his father did to me.” So David sent [a letter along with] some of his servants to console him in regard to his father’s death; and David’s servants came into the land of the Ammonites. 3But the princes of the Ammonites [were suspicious and] said to Hanun their lord, “Do you think that David is honoring your father because he has sent comforters to you? Has David not sent his servants to you in order to search the city, to spy it out and overthrow it?” 4So Hanun took David’s servants and shaved off half their beards, and cut off their robes in the middle as far as their hips, and sent them away. 5When David was informed, he sent [messengers] to meet them [before they reached Jerusalem], for the men were greatly ashamed and humiliated. And the king said, “Stay at Jericho until your beards grow, and then return.”

6When the Ammonites saw that they had become an object of hatred to David, they sent word and hired the Arameans (Syrians) of Beth-rehob and the Arameans of Zobah, 20,000 foot soldiers, and the king of Maacah with 1,000 men, and the men of Tob with 12,000 men [to fight for them]. 7When David heard about it, he sent Joab and the entire army, the strong and brave men. 8The Ammonites came out and lined up for battle at the entrance of the [city] gate, but the Arameans of Zobah and Rehob and the men of Tob and Maacah were [stationed] by themselves in the field.

9Now when Joab saw that the battlefront was against him in front and in the rear, he selected some of all the choice men in Israel and set them in battle formation to meet the Arameans (Syrians). 10But he placed the rest of the men in the hand of his brother Abishai, and he placed them in battle formation to meet the Ammonites. 11Joab said [to Abishai], “If the Arameans are too strong for me, then you shall help me; but if the Ammonites are too strong for you, I will come to help you. 12“Be courageous, and let us show ourselves courageous for the benefit of our people and the cities of our God. And may the LORD do what is good in His sight.” 13So Joab and the people who were with him approached the battle against the Arameans, and they fled before him. 14When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled, they also fled before Abishai and entered the city. So Joab returned from battling against the Ammonites and came to Jerusalem.

15When the Arameans saw that they were defeated by Israel, they gathered together. 16Hadadezer sent word and brought out the Arameans who were beyond the River [Euphrates]; and they came to Helam; and Shobach the commander of the army of Hadadezer led them. 17When David was informed, he gathered all Israel together and crossed the Jordan, and came to Helam. Then the Arameans assembled in battle formation to meet David and fought against him. 18But the Arameans fled before Israel, and David killed 700 Aramean charioteers and 40,000 horsemen, and struck Shobach the commander of their army, and he died there. 19When all the kings serving Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they made peace with Israel and served them. So the Arameans (Syrians) were afraid to help the Ammonites anymore.

2 Samuel 11
Bathsheba, David’s Great Sin

1Then it happened in the spring, at the time when the kings go out to battle, that David sent Joab and his servants with him, and all [the fighting men of] Israel, and they destroyed the Ammonites and besieged Rabbah. But David remained in Jerusalem.

2One evening David got up from his couch and was walking on the [flat] roof of the king’s palace, and from there he saw a woman bathing; and she was very beautiful in appearance. 3David sent word and inquired about the woman. Someone said, “Is this not Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?” 4David sent messengers and took her. When she came to him, he lay with her. And when she was purified from her uncleanness, she returned to her house. 5The woman conceived; and she sent word and told David, “I am pregnant.”

6Then David sent word to Joab, saying, “Send me Uriah the Hittite.” So Joab sent Uriah to David. 7When Uriah came to him, David asked him how Joab was, how the people were doing, and how the war was progressing. 8Then David said to Uriah, “Go down to your house, and wash your feet (spend time at home).” Uriah left the king’s palace, and a gift from the king was sent out after him. 9But Uriah slept at the entrance of the king’s palace with all the servants of his lord, and did not go down to his house. 10When they told David, “Uriah did not go down to his house,” David said to Uriah, “Have you not [just] come from a [long] journey? Why did you not go to your house?” 11Uriah said to David, “The ark and Israel and Judah are staying in huts (temporary shelters), and my lord Joab and the servants of my lord are camping in the open field. Should I go to my house to eat and drink and lie with my wife? By your life and the life of your soul, I will not do this thing.” 12Then David said to Uriah, “Stay here today as well, and tomorrow I will let you leave.” So Uriah remained in Jerusalem that day and the next. 13Now David called him [to dinner], and he ate and drank with him, so that he made Uriah drunk; in the evening he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, and [still] did not go down to his house.

14In the morning David wrote a letter to Joab and sent it with Uriah. 15He wrote in the letter, “Put Uriah in the front line of the heaviest fighting and leave him, so that he may be struck down and die.” 16So it happened that as Joab was besieging the city, he assigned Uriah to the place where he knew the [enemy’s] valiant men were positioned. 17And the men of the city came out and fought against Joab, and some of the people among the servants of David fell; Uriah the Hittite also died. 18Then Joab sent word and informed David of all the events of the war. 19And he commanded the messenger, “When you have finished reporting all the events of the war to the king, 20then if the king becomes angry and he says to you, ‘Why did you go so near to the city to fight? Did you not know that they would shoot [arrows] from the wall? 21‘Who killed Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth (Gideon)? Was it not a woman who threw an upper millstone on him from the wall so that he died at Thebez? Why did you go so near the wall?’ Then you shall say, ‘Your servant Uriah the Hittite is also dead.’”

22So the messenger left, and he came and told David everything that Joab had sent him to report. 23The messenger said to David, “The men indeed prevailed against us and came out to us in the field, but we were on them and pushed them as far as the entrance of the [city] gate. 24“Then the archers shot at your servants from the wall. Some of the king’s servants are dead, and your servant Uriah the Hittite is also dead.” 25Then David said to the messenger, “Tell Joab this, ‘Do not let this thing disturb you, for the sword devours one [side] as well as another. Strengthen your battle against the city and overthrow it’; and so encourage Joab.”

26When Uriah’s wife [Bathsheba] heard that her husband Uriah was dead, she mourned for her husband. 27And when the time of mourning was past, David sent word and had her brought to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But the thing that David had done [with Bathsheba] was evil in the sight of the LORD.

2 Samuel 12
Nathan Rebukes David

1And the LORD sent Nathan [the prophet] to David. He came and said to him,
“There were two men in a city, one rich and the other poor.
2“The rich man had a very large number of flocks and herds,
3But the poor man had nothing but one little ewe lamb
Which he had purchased and nourished;
And it grew up together with him and his children.
It ate his food, drank from his cup, it lay in his arms,
And was like a daughter to him.
4“Now a traveler (visitor) came to the rich man,
And to avoid taking one from his own flock or herd
To prepare [a meal] for the traveler who had come to him,
He took the poor man’s ewe lamb and prepared it for his guest.”

5Then David’s anger burned intensely against the man, and he said to Nathan, “As the LORD lives, the man who has done this deserves to die. 6“He shall make restitution for the ewe lamb four times as much [as the lamb was worth], because he did this thing and had no compassion.”

7Then Nathan said to David, “You are the man! Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, ‘I anointed you as king over Israel, and I spared you from the hand of Saul. 8‘I also gave you your master’s house, and put your master’s wives into your care and under your protection, and I gave you the house (royal dynasty) of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would have given you much more! 9‘Why have you despised the word of the LORD by doing evil in His sight? You have struck down Uriah the Hittite with the sword and have taken his wife to be your wife. You have killed him with the sword of the Ammonites. 10‘Now, therefore, the sword shall never depart from your house, because you have despised Me and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your wife.’ 11Thus says the LORD, ‘Behold, I will stir up evil against you from your own household; and I will take your wives before your eyes and give them to your companion, and he will lie with your wives in broad daylight. 12‘Indeed you did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and in broad daylight.’” 13David said to Nathan, “I have sinned against the LORD.” And Nathan said to David, “The LORD also has allowed your sin to pass [without further punishment]; you shall not die. 14“Nevertheless, because by this deed you have given [a great] opportunity to the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme [Him], the son that is born to you shall certainly die.” 15Then Nathan went [back] to his home.

Loss of a Child 16> And the LORD struck the child that Uriah’s widow bore to David, and he was very sick. 17David therefore appealed to God for the child [to be healed]; and David fasted and went in and lay all night on the ground. 18The elders of his household stood by him [in the night] to lift him up from the ground, but he was unwilling [to get up] and would not eat food with them. 19Then it happened on the seventh day that the child died. David’s servants were afraid to tell him that the child was dead, for they said, “While the child was still alive, we spoke to him and he would not listen to our voices. How then can we tell him the child is dead, since he might harm himself [or us]?” 20But when David saw that his servants were whispering to one another, he realized that the child was dead. So David said to them, “Is the child dead?” And they said, “He is dead.” 21Then David got up from the ground, washed, anointed himself [with olive oil], changed his clothes, and went into the house of the LORD and worshiped. Then he came [back] to his own house, and when he asked, they set food before him and he ate.

22Then his servants said to him, “What is this thing that you have done? While the child was alive you fasted and wept, but when the child died, you got up and ate food.” 23David said, “While the child was still alive, I fasted and wept; for I thought, ‘Who knows, the LORD may be gracious to me and the child may live.’ 24“But now he is dead; why should I [continue to] fast? Can I bring him back again? I will go to him [when I die], but he will not return to me.”

Solomon Born 25David comforted his wife Bathsheba, and went to her and lay with her; and she gave birth to a son, and David named him Solomon. And the LORD loved the child; 26and He sent word through Nathan the prophet, and he named him Jedidiah (beloved of the LORD) for the sake of the LORD [who loved the child].

War Again 27Now Joab fought against Rabbah of the Ammonites and captured the royal city. 28Joab sent messengers to David and said, “I have fought against Rabbah; I have even taken the city of waters. 29“So now, assemble the rest of the men, and camp against the city and capture it, or I will take the city myself, and it will be named after me.” 30So David gathered all the men together and went to Rabbah, then fought against it and captured it. 31And he took the crown of their king from his head; it weighed a talent of gold, and [set in it was] a precious stone; and it was placed on David’s head. And he brought the spoil out of the city in great amounts. 32He also brought out the people who were there, and put them to [work with] the saws and sharp iron instruments and iron axes, and made them work at the brickkiln. And he did this to all the Ammonite cities. Then David and all the men returned to Jerusalem.

2 Samuel 13
Amnon And Tamar

1It happened afterwards that Absalom the son of David had a beautiful sister whose name was Tamar, and Amnon [her half brother] the son of David was in love with her. 2Amnon was so frustrated because of his [half-] sister Tamar that he made himself sick, for she was a virgin, and Amnon thought it impossible for him to do anything to her. 3But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab the son of Shimeah, David’s brother; and Jonadab was a very shrewd (cunning) man. 4He said to Amnon, “Why are you, the king’s son, so depressed morning after morning? Will you not tell me?” And Amnon said to him, “I am in love with Tamar, my [half-] brother Absalom’s sister.” 5Jonadab said to him, “Go to bed and pretend you are sick; and when your father [David] comes to see you, say to him, ‘Just let my sister Tamar come and serve me food, and let her prepare it in my sight, so that I may see it and eat it from her hand.’” 6So Amnon lay down and pretended to be sick; and when the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, “Please let my sister Tamar come and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, so that I may eat from her hand.”

7Then David sent word to the house for Tamar, saying, “Go now to your brother Amnon’s house, and prepare some food for him.” 8So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house, and he was in bed. And she took dough and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and baked them. 9She took the pan and dished them out before him, but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, “Have everyone leave me.” So everyone left him [except Tamar]. 10Then Amnon said to Tamar, “Bring the food into the bedroom, so that I may eat from your hand.” So Tamar took the cakes she had made and brought them into the bedroom to her [half-] brother Amnon. 11When she brought them to him to eat, he took hold of her and said, “Come, lie with me, my sister.” 12She replied, “No, my brother! Do not violate me, for such a thing is not done in Israel; do not do this disgraceful thing! 13“As for me, how could I get rid of my shame and disgrace? And you, you will be considered one of the fools in Israel. So now, just speak to the king [about taking me as your wife], for he will not withhold me from you.” 14But he would not listen to her; and since he was stronger than she, he violated her and lay with her.

15Then Amnon became extremely hateful toward her, for his hatred toward her was greater than the love which he had for her. And Amnon said to her, “Get up and get out!” 16But she said, “No, because this wrong of sending me away is worse than the other that you have done to me!” But he would not listen to her. 17Instead, he called his young man who was his personal servant and said, “Now throw this woman out of my presence and bolt the door behind her.” 18Now Tamar was wearing a [long-sleeved] robe of various colors; for that is how the virgin daughters of the king dressed themselves in robes. Then Amnon’s personal servant took her out and bolted the door behind her. 19So Tamar put dust on her head [in grief] and tore the long-sleeved robe which she had on, and she put her hand on her head and went away crying out [for help].

20So her brother Absalom said to her, “Has your brother Amnon been with you? But now keep silent, my sister; he is your brother; do not take this matter to heart.” So Tamar remained secluded in her brother Absalom’s house. 21Now when King David heard about all these things, he was very angry [but failed to take any action]. 22But Absalom did not speak to Amnon either good or bad; for Absalom hated Amnon because he had violated his sister Tamar.

23Now it came about after two full years that Absalom had sheepshearers at Baal-hazor near Ephraim, and Absalom invited all the king’s sons [to a party]. Absalom Avenges Tamar 24Absalom came to [his father] the king and said, “Behold, your servant has sheepshearers; please let the king and his servants go with your servant.” 25But the king said to Absalom, “No, my son, we should not all go, for we will be a burden to you.” Although Absalom [strongly] urged David, still he would not go, but he gave him his blessing. 26Then Absalom said, “If not, then at least let my brother Amnon go with us.” And the king said to him, “Why should he go with you?” 27But Absalom urged him [again], and he let Amnon and all the king’s sons go with him.

28Now Absalom commanded his servants, “Notice carefully, when Amnon’s heart is joyous with wine, and when I say to you, ‘Strike Amnon,’ then kill him. Do not be afraid; have I not commanded you myself [and in doing so have I not taken full responsibility for his death]? Be courageous and brave.” 29So the servants of Absalom did to Amnon just as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king’s sons got up, and every man mounted his mule and fled.

30Now it happened while they were on the way [back home], that the [exaggerated] report came to David, “Absalom has killed all the king’s sons, and not one of them is left.” 31Then the king stood and tore his clothes and lay on the ground [in mourning]; and all his servants were standing by with their clothes torn. 32But Jonadab the son of Shimeah, David’s brother, responded, “Do not let my lord assume that all the king’s sons have been put to death; for only Amnon is dead. This act of revenge has been on Absalom’s mind since the day Amnon violated his sister Tamar. 33“So now, do not let my lord the king take the report to heart that all the king’s sons are dead; for Amnon alone is dead.”

34Now Absalom fled. And the young man who kept watch looked up, and behold, many people were coming from the road behind him by the side of the mountain. 35And Jonadab said to the king, “Look, the king’s sons are coming. It has turned out just as your servant said.” 36And when he finished speaking, the king’s sons came, and they raised their voices and wept; and the king and all his servants also wept very bitterly.

37But Absalom fled and went to [his mother’s father] Talmai the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day. 38So Absalom fled and went to Geshur, and was there for three years. 39And the heart of King David longed to go to Absalom; for he was comforted regarding Amnon, since he was dead.

2 Samuel 14
The Woman Of Tekoa

1Now Joab the son of Zeruiah knew that the king’s heart longed for Absalom. 2So Joab sent word to Tekoa and had a wise woman brought from there and told her, “Please pretend to be a mourner, and put on mourning clothes, and do not anoint yourself with oil, but act like a woman who has for many days been in mourning for the dead. 3“Then go to the king and speak to him in this way.” So Joab told her what to say.

4When the woman of Tekoa spoke to the king, she bowed with her face to the ground and lay herself down, and said, “Help, O king.” 5The king asked her, “What is the matter?” She said, “Truly I am a widow; my husband is dead. 6Your maidservant had two sons, but the two of them struggled and fought in the field. There was no one to separate them, so one struck the other and killed him. 7“Now behold, the entire family has risen against your maidservant, and they say, ‘Hand over the one who killed his brother, so that we may put him to death [to pay] for the life of his brother whom he killed and destroy the heir also.’ By doing this they will extinguish my coal that is left, leaving my husband without a name or a remnant (heir) on the face of the earth.”

8Then David said to the woman, “Go to your home, and I will give orders concerning you.” 9The woman of Tekoa said to the king, “My lord, O king, the guilt is on me and on my father’s house, but the king and his throne are guiltless.” 10The king said, “If anyone speaks to you [about this matter], bring him to me [for judgment], and he will not touch you again.” 11Then she said, “Please let the king remember the LORD your God, so that the avenger of blood will not continue to destroy, otherwise they will destroy my son.” And David said, “As the LORD lives, not a single hair [from the head] of your son shall fall to the ground.”

12Then the woman said, “Please let your maidservant speak one more word to my lord the king.” He said, “Speak.” 13The woman said, “Now why have you planned such a thing against God’s people? For in speaking this word the king is like a guilty man, in that the king does not bring back his banished one. 14For we will certainly die and are like water that is spilled on the ground and cannot be gathered up again. Yet God does not [simply] take away life, but devises plans so that the one who is banished is not driven away from Him. 15Now I came to speak of this matter to my lord the king because the people have made me afraid. So your maidservant thought, ‘I will just speak to the king; perhaps the king will do what his maidservant requests. 16‘For the king will hear and save his maidservant from the hand of the man who would destroy me and my son together from the inheritance of God.’ 17“Then your maidservant said, ‘Please let the word of my lord the king be comforting, for my lord the king is as the angel of God to discern good and evil. May the LORD your God be with you.’”

18Then the king answered and said to the woman, “Do not hide from me anything that I ask you.” And the woman said, “Let my lord the king please speak.” 19The king said, “Is the hand of Joab with you in all of this?” And the woman answered, “As your soul lives, my lord the king, no one can turn to the right or to the left from anything that my lord the king has said. Indeed, it was your servant Joab who commanded me; he put all these words in the mouth of your maidservant. 20“In order to change the appearance of things [between Absalom and you, his father] your servant Joab did this thing. But my lord has wisdom like the wisdom of the angel of God, to know everything that is in the earth.”

Absalom Is Recalled 21Then the king said to Joab, “Listen, I will most certainly do this thing; now go, bring back the young man Absalom.” 22Joab bowed his face toward the ground and lay himself down and blessed the king. Then Joab said, “Today your servant knows that I have found favor in your sight, my lord, O king, in that the king has done the request of his servant.” 23So Joab got up, went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. 24However, the king said, “Let him go to his own house, and do not let him see my face.” So Absalom went to his own house and did not see the king’s face.

25Now in all Israel there was no man as handsome as Absalom, so highly praised [for that]; from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him. 26When he cut the hair of his head (for at the end of each year he cut it, because its weight was heavy on him) he weighed the hair of his head at 200 shekels by the king’s weight. 27To Absalom were born three sons and one daughter whose name was Tamar; she was a beautiful woman.

28Absalom lived two full years in Jerusalem, without seeing the king’s face. 29So Absalom sent for Joab, to send him to the king, but he would not come to him; even when he sent again a second time, he [still] would not come. 30Therefore Absalom said to his servants, “See, Joab’s property is near mine, and he has barley there; go and set it on fire.” So Absalom’s servants set the field on fire. 31Then Joab took action and went to Absalom at his house and said to him, “Why did your servants set my field on fire?” 32Absalom answered Joab, “I sent for you, saying, ‘Come here, so that I may send you to the king to ask, “Why have I come [back] from Geshur? It would be better for me to still be there.”’ Now then, let me see the king’s face, and if there is guilt in me, let him put me to death.” 33So Joab came to the king and told him. Then David called for Absalom, and he came to the king and bowed his face to the ground before the king; and the king kissed Absalom.

2 Samuel 15
Absalom’s Conspiracy

1After this, Absalom provided for himself a chariot and horses, and fifty men as runners before him. 2He would get up early and stand beside the road to the gate [of the city, where court was held]; and when any man who had a dispute came to the king for judgment, Absalom would call to him, “From what city are you?” And he would say, “Your servant is from one of the tribes of Israel.” 3Then Absalom would say to him, “See, your claims are good and right, but there is no man appointed as the king’s agent to listen to you.” 4Moreover Absalom would say, “Oh, that I were appointed judge in the land! Then every man who had a dispute could come to me and I would get justice for him.” 5And whenever a man approached to bow down before him, he would put out his hand, take hold of him, and kiss him. 6This is how Absalom dealt with everyone in Israel who came to the king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.

7And after four years, Absalom said to the king, “Please let me go and pay my vow which I have made to the LORD at Hebron [my birthplace]. 8“For your servant made a vow while I lived at Geshur in Aram (Syria), ‘If the LORD will in fact bring me back to Jerusalem, then I will serve the Lord [by offering a sacrifice of thanksgiving].’” 9And [David] the king said to him, “Go in peace.” So he arose and went to Hebron. 10But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, “As soon as you hear the sound of the trumpet, you shall say, ‘Absalom is king in Hebron.’” 11Then two hundred men from Jerusalem who were invited [as guests to his sacrificial feast] went with Absalom. They went innocently and knew nothing [about his plan against David]. 12And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counselor, from his city Giloh, while he was offering sacrifices. And the conspiracy grew strong, for the people with Absalom increased continually.

David Flees Jerusalem 13Then a messenger came to David, saying, “The hearts of the men of Israel are with Absalom.” 14David said to all his servants who were with him at Jerusalem, “Arise, let us flee, or none of us will escape from Absalom! Go in haste, or he will overtake us quickly and bring disaster on us and strike the city with the edge of the sword.” 15The king’s servants said to him, “Listen, your servants are ready to do whatever my lord the king decides.” 16So the king left, and all his household with him. But the king left behind ten women who were concubines to take care of the house (palace). 17The king left, and all the people with him, and they stopped at the last house. 18All of David’s servants passed on beside him, and all the Cherethites, Pelethites and the Gittites, six hundred men who had come with him from Gath, passed on before the king.

19Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, “Why should you go with us, too? Go back and stay with the king [of your own country], for you are a foreigner and an exile as well; return to your own place. 20“You came only yesterday, so should I make you wander with us today while I go where I will? Return and take your brothers back with you also. May lovingkindness and faithfulness be with you.” 21But Ittai answered the king, “As the LORD lives, and as my lord the king lives, most certainly wherever my lord the king may be, whether for death or life, there will your servant be also.” 22So David said to Ittai, “Go on and cross over [the Brook Kidron].” So Ittai the Gittite crossed over with all his men and all the little ones who were with him. 23While all the country was weeping with a loud voice, all the people crossed over. The king also crossed the Brook Kidron, and all the people went on toward the way of the wilderness [that lies between Jerusalem and the Jordan River].

24Now Zadok also came, and all the Levites with him carrying the ark of the covenant of God. And they set down the ark of God, and Abiathar [the priest] came up [and officiated] until all the people had finished passing from the city. 25Then the king told Zadok, “Take the ark of God back to [its rightful place in] the city [of Jerusalem, the capital]. If I find favor in the LORD’S sight, He will bring me back again and let me see both it and His dwelling place (habitation). 26“But if He should say, ‘I have no delight in you,’ then here I am; let Him do to me what seems good to Him.” 27The king also said to Zadok the priest, “Are you not a seer? Return to the city in peace [you and Abiathar], and your two sons with you, your son Ahimaaz and Jonathan the son of Abiathar. 28“See, I am going to wait at the fords [of the Jordan] in the wilderness until word comes from you to inform me.” 29So Zadok and Abiathar brought the ark of God back to Jerusalem, and they stayed there.

30And David went up the ascent of the Mount of Olives, weeping as he went, with his head covered and walking barefoot [in despair]. And all the people who were with him covered their heads and went up, weeping as they went. 31David was told, “Ahithophel [your counselor] is among the conspirators with Absalom.” David said, “O LORD, I pray You, turn Ahithophel’s counsel into foolishness.”

32It happened when David came to the summit [of the Mount of Olives], where he worshiped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his tunic torn and dust on his head [as if in mourning]. 33David said to him, “If you go on with me, you will be a burden to me. 34But if you return to the city, and say to Absalom, ‘I will be your servant, O king; as I have been your father’s servant in the past, so I will be your servant now;’ then you can thwart (make useless) the advice of Ahithophel for me. 35Are not Zadok and Abiathar the priests with you there? So it shall be that every word you hear from the king’s palace, you shall report it to them. 36“Their two sons are there with them, Ahimaaz, Zadok’s son and Jonathan, Abiathar’s son; and by them you shall send to me everything that you hear.” 37So Hushai, David’s friend, returned to the city, and [at about the same time] Absalom came into Jerusalem.

2 Samuel 16
Ziba, A False Servant

1When David was a little past the summit [of the Mount of Olives], behold, Ziba, the servant of Mephibosheth, met him with a team of saddled donkeys, and on them were two hundred loaves of bread, a hundred clusters of raisins, a hundred summer fruits, and a jug of wine. 2The king said to Ziba, “Why do you have these?” Ziba said, “The donkeys are for the king’s household (family) to ride on, the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat, and the wine is for anyone to drink who becomes weary in the wilderness.” 3Then the king said, “And where is your master’s son [Mephibosheth]?” Ziba said to the king, “Behold, he remains in Jerusalem, for he said, ‘Today the house of Israel will give me back the kingdom of my father.’” 4Then the king said to Ziba, “Behold, everything that belonged to Mephibosheth is [now] yours.” Ziba said, “I bow down [in honor and gratitude]; let me find favor in your sight, O my lord the king.”

David Is Cursed 5When King David came to Bahurim, a man named Shimei, the son of Gera, came out from there. He was of the family of Saul’s household and he was cursing continually as he came out. 6He threw stones at David and at all the servants of King David; yet all the people and all the warriors remained on his right and on his left. 7This is what Shimei said as he cursed: “Get out, get out, you man of bloodshed, you worthless and useless man! 8“The LORD has returned upon you all the bloodshed of the house of Saul, in whose place you have reigned; and the LORD has given the kingdom into the hands of Absalom your son. And behold, you are caught in your own evil, for you are a man of bloodshed!”

9Then Abishai [David’s nephew], the son of Zeruiah, said to the king, “Why should this dead dog (despicable person) curse my lord the king? Let me go over and take off his head.” 10But the king said, “What business is this of yours, O sons of Zeruiah? If Shimei is cursing because the LORD said to him, ‘Curse David,’ then who should say, ‘Why have you done so?’” 11Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants, “Look, my son [Absalom] who came from my own body, is seeking my life; how much more [reason] now [does] this Benjamite [have to curse me]? Let him alone and let him curse, for [it could be that] the LORD has told him [to do it]. 12“Perhaps the LORD will look on the wrong done to me [by Shimei, if he is acting on his own]; and [in that case perhaps] the Lord will this day return good to me in place of his cursing.” 13So David and his men went on the road; and Shimei went along on the hillside close beside David and cursed as he went and threw stones and dust at him. 14The king and all the people who were with him arrived [at the Jordan River] weary, and he refreshed himself there.

Absalom Enters Jerusalem 15Then Absalom and all the people, the men of Israel, entered Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him. 16Now it happened when Hushai the Archite, David’s friend, came to Absalom, Hushai said to him, “Long live the king! Long live the king!” 17Absalom said to Hushai, “Is this your loyalty to your friend? Why did you not go with your friend?” 18Hushai said to Absalom, “No! For whomever the LORD and this people and all the men of Israel have chosen [as king], I will be his, and I will remain with him. 19“Besides, whom should I serve? Should I not serve in the presence of David’s son? As I have served in your father’s presence, so I shall serve in your presence.”

20Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, “Give me your advice. What should we do?” 21Ahithophel said to Absalom, “Go in to your father’s concubines, whom he has left behind to take care of the house; then all Israel will hear that you have made yourself odious to your father. Then the hands of all who are with you will be strengthened [by your boldness and audacity].” 22So they pitched a tent for Absalom on the roof [of the king’s palace], and Absalom went in to his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel. 23The advice of Ahithophel, which he gave in those days, was as if a man had consulted the word of God; that is how all Ahithophel’s counsel was regarded by both David and Absalom.

2 Samuel 17
Hushai’s Counsel

1Then, Ahithophel said to Absalom, “Please let me choose 12,000 men, and I will set out and pursue David tonight. 2I will strike while he is weary and exhausted, and terrify him; and all the people with him will flee [in terror]. Then I will attack the king alone, 3and I will bring all the people [who follow David] back to you. The return of everyone depends on the [death of the] man you are seeking; then all the people will be at peace [and accept you as king].” 4So the plan pleased Absalom and all the elders of Israel.

5Nevertheless, Absalom said, “Now call Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear what he has to say.” 6When Hushai came to Absalom, Absalom said to him, “Ahithophel has advised this [plan of action]. Should we do what he says? If not, you speak [and explain why not].” 7So Hushai said to Absalom, “Ahithophel has not given good advice this time.” 8And Hushai said, “You know your father and his men, that they are brave men, and they are enraged and fierce, like a bear deprived of her cubs in the field. Your father is a [shrewd] man of war, and will not spend the night with the people [knowing that you seek his life]. 9Behold, he has hidden himself [even] now in one of the ravines or in another place; and when some of your troops fall at the first attack, whoever hears about it will say, ‘There has been a defeat among the people who follow Absalom.’ 10And even the one who is brave, whose heart is like the heart of a lion, will completely lose heart and melt away; for all Israel knows that your father is a mighty man, and that those who are with him are brave men. 11But I advise that all [the men of] Israel be summoned to you, from Dan [in the north] to Beersheba [in the south], like the sand that is by the sea in abundance, and that you personally go into battle. 12So shall we come upon David in one of the places where he can be found, and we will fall on him as the dew falls [unseen and unheard] on the ground; and of him and of all the men who are with him, not even one will be left. 13“If he retreats into a city, then all Israel shall bring ropes to that city, and we will drag it into the ravine until not even a pebble [of it] is found there.” 14Then Absalom and all the men of Israel said, “The advice of Hushai the Archite is better than that of Ahithophel.” For the LORD had ordained to thwart the good advice of Ahithophel, so that the LORD could bring disaster upon Absalom.

Hushai’s Warning Saves David 15Then Hushai said to Zadok and Abiathar the priests, “This is the advice that Ahithophel gave to Absalom and the elders of Israel, and this is the advice that I have given. 16“Now then, send word quickly and tell David, ‘Do not spend the night at the fords [on the west side of the Jordan] in the wilderness, but by all means cross over [to the east side of the river], or else the king and all the people with him will be destroyed [if Ahithophel is allowed by Absalom to lead an attack].’” 17Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz [the priests’ sons] were staying at En-rogel, and a maidservant [appearing to go for water] would go and tell them [what was happening], and they would go [secretly] and inform King David; for they could not [allow themselves to] be seen coming into the city [of Jerusalem]. 18But a boy saw them and told Absalom; so the two of them left quickly and came to the house of a man in Bahurim, who had a well in his courtyard, and [with his permission] they went down into it. 19And the woman [of the house] took a covering and spread it over the mouth of the well and scattered grain on it; so nothing was discovered. 20Then Absalom’s servants came to the woman at the house and asked, “Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?” And the woman said to them, “They have crossed over the brook.” When they searched and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.

21After they left, Jonathan and Ahimaaz came up out of the well and went and informed King David, and said to David, “Arise and cross over the Jordan River quickly, for Ahithophel has advised [an attack] against you.” 22Then David and all the people who were with him departed and crossed over the Jordan. By daybreak, not even one was left who had not crossed the Jordan.

23Now when Ahithophel saw that his advice had not been followed, he saddled his donkey and set out and went to his home, to his city. Then he put his household in order, and hanged himself. So he died and was buried in the tomb of his father.

24Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom crossed over the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him. 25Absalom put Amasa in command of the army instead of Joab. Now Amasa was the son of a man named Ithra the Israelite, who had married Abigail the daughter of Nahash, [the half sister of David and] the sister of Zeruiah, Joab’s mother. 26So Israel and Absalom camped in the land of Gilead.

27When David came to Mahanaim, Shobi the son of Nahash from Rabbah of the Ammonites, and Machir the son of Ammiel from Lo-debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim 28brought beds, basins, pottery, wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain, broad beans, lentils, and [other] roasted grain, 29honey, cream, sheep, and cheese of the herd, for David and the people who were with him, to eat; for they said, “The people are hungry and weary and thirsty in the wilderness.”

2 Samuel 18
Absalom’s Death

1David numbered the men who were with him and set over them commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds. 2Then David sent the army out, a third under the command of Joab, a third under Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab’s brother, and a third under the command of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the men, “I myself will certainly go out [to fight] with you.” 3But the men said, “You should not go out [to battle with us]. For if in fact we retreat, they will not care about us; even if half of us die, they will not care about us. But you are worth ten thousand of us. So now it is better that you be ready to help us from the city [of Mahanaim].” 4Then the king said to them, “I will do whatever seems best to you.” So the king stood beside the gate [of Mahanaim], and all the army went out in groups of hundreds and of thousands. 5The king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, “Deal gently with the young man Absalom for my sake.” And all the men heard when the king gave orders to all the commanders about Absalom.

6So the men went out into the field against Israel, and the battle was fought in the forest of Ephraim. 7The men of Israel [who supported Absalom] were defeated there by the men of David, and a great slaughter took place there that day, 20,000 men. 8For the battle there was spread out over the surface of the entire countryside, and the [hazards of the] forest devoured more men that day than did the sword.

9Now Absalom met the servants of David. Absalom was riding on his mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a massive tree, and his head was caught in [the thick branches of] the tree; and he was left hanging [in midair] between heaven and earth, while the mule that had been under him kept going. 10A certain man saw it and informed Joab, saying, “I saw Absalom hanging in a tree.” 11Joab said to the man who informed him, “You saw him! Why then did you not strike him there to the ground? I would have given you ten pieces of silver and a belt.” 12The man told Joab, “Even if I were to feel the weight of a thousand pieces of silver in my hands, I would not put out my hand against the king’s son; for we all heard the king command you, Abishai, and Ittai, saying, ‘Protect the young man Absalom, for my sake.’ 13“Otherwise, if I had acted treacherously against his life (for nothing is hidden from the king) you yourself would have taken sides against me.” 14Joab said, “I will not waste time with you.” So he took three spears in his hand and thrust them through the heart of Absalom while he was still alive [and caught] in the midst of the tree. 15And ten young men, Joab’s armor bearers, surrounded and struck Absalom and killed him.

16Then Joab blew the trumpet [to signal the end of the combat], and the men returned from pursuing Israel, for Joab held them back. 17They took [down the body of] Absalom and threw him into a deep pit in the forest and set up a huge mound of stones over him. Then all Israel fled, everyone to his own tent. 18Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and set up for himself a memorial pillar which is in the King’s Valley, for he said, “I have no son to keep my name in remembrance.” He named the memorial pillar after himself, and to this day it is called Absalom’s Monument.

David Is Grief-stricken 19Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, said, “Let me run and bring the king news that the LORD has vindicated him by rescuing him from [the power of] his enemies.” 20But Joab told him, “You are not the man to carry news [to King David] today, but you shall carry news another day. On this day you shall carry no news, because the king’s son is dead.” 21Then Joab said to the Cushite (Ethiopian), “Go, tell the king what you have seen.” And the Cushite bowed to Joab and ran. 22Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said again to Joab, “But whatever happens, please let me also run after the Cushite.” Joab said, “Why should you run, my son, seeing you will have no messenger’s reward for going [because you have only bad news]?” 23“But whatever happens, Let me run.” So Joab said to him, “Run.” Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain [of the Jordan River] and outran the Cushite.

24Now David was sitting between the two gates; and the lookout went up to the roof of the gate by the wall, and when he raised his eyes and looked, he saw a man running alone. 25The lookout called down and told the king. The king said, “If he is alone, he has good news to tell.” And he came nearer and nearer. 26Then the lookout saw another man running, and he called to the gatekeeper and said, “Look, another man running alone.” The king said, “He also is bringing good news.” 27The lookout said, “I think the man in front runs like Ahimaaz the son of Zadok.” The king said, “He is a good man and is coming with good news.”

28And Ahimaaz called out and said to the king, “All is well.” And he bowed before the king with his face to the ground and said, “Blessed be the LORD your God, who has handed over the men who lifted up their hands [to fight] against my lord the king.” 29The king asked, “Is the young man Absalom safe?” Ahimaaz answered, “When Joab sent the king’s servant, and your servant, I saw a great turmoil, but I do not know what it was about.” 30The king told him, “Step aside; stand here.” And he stepped aside and stood still.

31Behold, the Cushite (Ethiopian) arrived, and said, “Let my lord the king receive good news, for the LORD has vindicated you today by rescuing you from the hand (power) of all those who stood against you.” 32The king asked the Cushite, “Is the young man Absalom [my son] safe?” The Cushite replied, “May the enemies of my lord the king, and all those who rise against you to do evil, be [dead] like that young man is.”

33The king was deeply moved and went to the upper room over the gate and wept [in sorrow]. And this is what he said as he walked: “O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! How I wish that I had died instead of you, O Absalom, my son, my son!”

2 Samuel 19
Joab Reproves David’s Lament

1It was told to Joab, “Behold, the king is weeping and mourning for Absalom.” 2So the victory on that day was turned into mourning for all the people, for the people heard it said on that day, “The king grieves for his son.” 3The people stole into the city [of Mahanaim] that day, as people who are humiliated and ashamed steal away when they retreat in battle. 4But the king covered his face and cried out with a loud voice, “O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!” 5Then Joab came into the house to the king and said, “Today you have put all your servants to shame who this day have saved your life and the lives of your sons and your daughters, and the lives of your wives and concubines. 6For you love those who hate you and hate those who love you. For you have shown today that commanders and servants are nothing to you; for today I know that if Absalom had lived and all the rest of us had died today, then you would be pleased. 7“So now stand up, go out and speak kindly and encouragingly to your servants; for I swear by the LORD that if you do not go out, not a man will stay with you tonight. And this will be worse for you than all the evil that has come upon you from your youth until now.” David Restored as King 8Then the king stood and sat at the gate [of Mahanaim]. And they told all the people, “The king is sitting at the gate,” and all the people came before the king.

But Israel [Absalom’s troops] had fled, every man to his tent. 9All the people were quarreling throughout the tribes of Israel, saying, “The king rescued us from the hands of our enemies, and he saved us from the hands of the Philistines, but now he has fled out of the land from Absalom. 10“And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, has died in battle. So now, why are you [leaders] doing nothing about bringing back the king?”

11Then King David sent word to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, “Say to the elders of Judah, ‘Why are you the last to bring the king back to his house [in Jerusalem], since the word of all Israel has come to the king, and to his house? 12‘You are my brothers (relatives, relations); you are my bone and my flesh. Why then are you the last to bring back the king?’ 13“Say to Amasa [the commander of Absalom’s troops], ‘Are you not my bone and my flesh? May God do so to me, and more also, if you will not be commander of my army from now on in place of Joab.’” 14In this way he changed the hearts of all the men of Judah as one man, so they sent word to the king, “Return, you and all your servants.” 15So David returned and came to the Jordan. And [supporters from] Judah came to Gilgal to meet the king, to escort him across the Jordan.

16Then Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahurim, hurried and came down with the men [from the tribe of] of Judah to meet King David, 17and a thousand men [from the tribe] of Benjamin with him. And Ziba, the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and twenty servants with him, rushed down to the Jordan before the king. 18Then they [repeatedly] crossed the ford to bring over the king’s household (family), and to do what pleased him. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king as he was about to cross the Jordan, 19and said to the king, “Let not my lord consider me guilty, nor remember what your servant did wrong on the day my lord the king left Jerusalem, so that the king would take it to heart. 20“For your servant knows that I have sinned; therefore, behold, I have come today, the first of all the house of Joseph to come down to meet my lord the king.” 21But Abishai the son of Zeruiah said, “Should not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD’S anointed?” 22David said, “What business is this of yours, you sons of Zeruiah, that you should be an adversary to me today? Should anyone be put to death in Israel today? For do I not know that today I am king over Israel?” 23Therefore the king said to Shimei, “You shall not be put to death.” And so the king gave him his promise.

24Then Mephibosheth the [grand]son of Saul came down to meet the king, but he had not cared for his feet, nor trimmed his mustache, nor washed his clothes from the day the king left until the day he returned in peace and safety. 25And when he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to him, “Why did you not go with me, Mephibosheth?” 26He said, “My lord the king, my servant [Ziba] betrayed me; for I said, ‘Saddle a donkey for me so that I may ride on it and go with the king,’ for your servant is lame [but he took the donkeys and left without me]. 27Further, he has slandered your servant to my lord the king; but my lord the king is like the angel of God; so do what is good in your eyes. 28“For were not all of my father’s household (family) nothing but dead men before my lord the king; yet you set your servant among those who ate at your own table. So what right do I still have to cry out anymore to the king [for help]?” 29The king said to him, “Why speak anymore of your affairs? I have said, ‘You and Ziba shall divide the land.’” 30Mephibosheth said to the king, “Let him even take it all, since my lord the king has returned to his own house in safety and peace.”

31Now Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim and went on to the Jordan with the king to escort him over the Jordan. 32Barzillai was a very old man, eighty years old; and he had provided the king with food while he stayed at Mahanaim, for he was a very great and wealthy man. 33The king said to Barzillai, “Cross over with me and I will provide for you in Jerusalem with me.” 34But Barzillai said to the king, “How much longer have I to live, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem? 35I am this day eighty years old. Can I [be useful to advise you to] discern between good and bad? Can your servant taste what I eat or drink? Can I still hear the voices of singing men and women? Why then should your servant be an added burden to my lord the king? 36Your servant would merely cross over the Jordan with the king. Why should the king compensate me with this reward? 37“Please let your servant return, so that I may die in my own city [and be buried] by the grave of my father and mother. But here is your servant Chimham [my son]; let him cross over with my lord the king, and do for him what seems good to you.” 38The king answered, “Chimham shall cross over with me, and I will do for him what seems good to you; and whatever you ask of me, I will do for you.” 39So all the people crossed over the Jordan. When the king had crossed over, he kissed Barzillai and blessed him, and he returned to his place.

40Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him; and all the people of Judah and also half the people of Israel accompanied the king. 41And all the men of Israel came to the king and said to him, “Why have our brothers (relatives), the men [from the tribe] of Judah, stolen you away and brought the king and his household and all David’s men with him over the Jordan [instead of waiting for us to arrive]?” 42Then all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, “Because the king is a close relative to us. So why then are you angry about this matter? Have we eaten at all at the king’s expense? Or has anything been taken for us?” 43Then the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, “We have ten [tribes’] shares in the king, and we have more claim on David than you. Why then did you treat us with contempt and ignore us [by rushing ahead]? Were we not the first to speak of bringing back our king?” But the words of the men of Judah were harsher than those of the men of Israel.

2 Samuel 20
Sheba’s Revolt

1There happened to be there a worthless and wicked man named Sheba the son of Bichri, a Benjamite. He blew a trumpet [to call Israel to revolt] and said,
“We have no portion in David
And no inheritance in the son of Jesse,
Every man to his tents, O Israel!”

2So all the men of Israel deserted David and followed Sheba the son of Bichri; but the men of Judah stayed faithfully with their king, from the Jordan to Jerusalem.

3Then David came to his house (palace) at Jerusalem, and the king took the ten women, his concubines whom he had left to take care of the house, and placed them under guard and provided for them, but did not go in to them. So they were confined, and lived as widows until the day of their death.

4Now the king said to Amasa [the commander of his army], “Summon the [fighting] men of Judah to me within three days, and be present here yourself.” 5So Amasa went to summon [the fighting men of] Judah, but he delayed longer than the time which David had set for him. 6And David said to Abishai [his nephew], “Now Sheba the son of Bichri will do us more harm than Absalom did. Take your lord’s servants and pursue him, so that he does not find fortified cities for himself and escape from our sight.” 7So Joab’s men went after him, along with [David’s bodyguards] the Cherethites and Pelethites and all the warriors; they went out from Jerusalem to pursue Sheba the son of Bichri. 8When they were at the great stone in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. Now Joab was wearing his military uniform, and over it he had a belt with a sheathed sword strapped around his hips; and as he went forward, it fell out. 9Joab said to Amasa, “Is it going well with you, my brother?” And with his right hand Joab took hold of Amasa by the beard [as if] to kiss him [in greeting]. Amasa Murdered 10But Amasa [who had replaced Joab as David’s commander] was off guard and not attentive to the sword in Joab’s hand. So Joab struck Amasa in the abdomen with the sword, spilling his intestines to the ground. Without another blow Amasa died. Then Joab and Abishai his brother pursued Sheba the son of Bichri. 11Now one of Joab’s young men stood by him and said, “Whoever favors Joab and is for David, let him follow Joab!” 12But Amasa was wallowing in his blood in the middle of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people who came by stopped [to look], he moved Amasa from the highway into the field and threw a garment over him when he saw that everyone who came by Amasa stopped. Revolt Put Down 13When [the body of] Amasa was removed from the highway, everyone followed after Joab to pursue Sheba the son of Bichri.

14Now Joab went through all the tribes of Israel to Abel, even Beth-maacah, and all the Berites; and they assembled and also went after Sheba. 15And the army of Joab came and besieged Sheba in Abel Beth-maacah, and they built up an assault ramp against the city, and it stood against the outer rampart; and all the people who were with Joab were wreaking destruction to make the wall fall. 16Then a wise woman cried out from the city, “Hear, hear! Tell Joab, ‘Come here so that I may speak to you.’” 17So when he approached her, the woman asked, “Are you Joab?” He answered, “I am.” Then she said to him, “Listen to the words of your maidservant.” He answered, “I am listening.” 18Then she said, “In the past people used to say, ‘They will certainly ask advice at Abel,’ and so they settled the dispute. 19“I am one of the peaceable and faithful in Israel. You are seeking to destroy a city, and a mother in Israel. Why would you swallow up (devour) the inheritance of the LORD?” 20Joab answered, “Far be it, far be it from me that I would swallow up or destroy! 21“That is not true. But a man of the hill country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, has lifted up his hand [in rebellion] against King David. Only hand him over, and I will leave the city.” And the woman said to Joab, “Behold, his head shall be thrown to you over the wall.” 22Then the woman in her wisdom went to all the people [to inform them of the agreement]. And they beheaded Sheba the son of Bichri and threw his head [down] to Joab. So he blew the trumpet [signaling the end of the attack], and they dispersed from the city, every man to his own tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem to [David] the king.

23Now Joab was [commander] over the entire army of Israel; Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was [commander] over the Cherethites and Pelethites [the king’s bodyguards]; 24Adoram was over the forced labor; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder; 25Sheva was the scribe; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests; 26also Ira the Jairite was a priest to David.

2 Samuel 21
Gibeonite Revenge

1There was famine in the days of David for three consecutive years; and David sought the presence (face) of the LORD [asking the reason]. The LORD replied, “It is because of Saul and his bloody house, because he put the Gibeonites to death.” 2So the king called the Gibeonites and spoke to them (now the Gibeonites were not of the sons (descendants) of Israel but of the remnant (survivors) of the Amorites. The Israelites had sworn [an oath] to [spare] them, but Saul in his zeal for the sons of Israel and Judah had sought to strike down the Gibeonites). 3So David said to the Gibeonites, “What should I do for you? How can I make it good so that you will bless the LORD’S inheritance (Israel)?” 4The Gibeonites said to him, “We will not accept silver or gold belonging to Saul or his household (descendants); nor is it for us to put any man to death in Israel.” David said, “I will do for you whatever you say.” 5So they said to the king, “The man who consumed us and planned to exterminate us from remaining in any territory of Israel, 6let seven men [chosen] from his sons (descendants) be given to us and we will hang them before the LORD [that is, put them on display, impaled with broken legs and arms] in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen one of the LORD.” And the king said, “I will give them.”

7But the king spared Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, because of the LORD’S oath that was between David and Saul’s son Jonathan. 8So the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth, and the five sons of Merab the daughter of Saul, whom she had borne to Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite. 9He handed them over to the Gibeonites, and they hanged them on the hill before the LORD, and the seven died together. They were put to death in the first days of the grain harvest, the beginning of the barley harvest [in the spring].

10Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth and spread it out for herself on the rock, from the beginning of harvest [in the spring] until [the autumn] rain fell on them; and she allowed neither the birds of the sky to rest on their bodies by day, nor the beasts of the field [to feed on them] by night. 11David was told what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done. 12Then David went and took the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had stolen them from the open square of Beth-shan, where the Philistines had hanged them on the day when the Philistines had killed Saul in Gilboa. 13He brought up the bones of Saul and of Jonathan his son from there, and they gathered the bones of those who had been hanged [with their arms and legs broken]. 14They buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son in the country of Benjamin in Zela, in the tomb of Kish his father; and they did all that the king commanded. After that, God was moved by prayer for the land.

15Now the Philistines were at war again with Israel. David went down with his servants, and as they fought against the Philistines, David became weary. 16Then Ishbi-benob, who was among the descendants of the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels (six pounds) of bronze, was armed with a new sword, and he intended to kill David. 17But Abishai the son of Zeruiah came to David’s aid, and struck and killed the Philistine. Then David’s men swore to him, “You shall not go out again with us to battle, so that you do not extinguish the lamp of Israel.”

18After this, there was war again with the Philistines at Gob (Gezer). At that time Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Saph (Sippai), who was among the descendants of the giant. 19There was war with the Philistines again at Gob, and Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim, a Bethlehemite, killed Goliath the Gittite, whose spear shaft was like a weaver’s beam. 20There was war at Gath again, where there was a man of great stature who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot, twenty-four in number; he also was a descendant of the giants. 21And when he taunted and defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimei, David’s brother, killed him. 22These four [warriors] were descended from the giant in Gath, and they fell by the hands of David and his servants.

2 Samuel 22
David’s Psalm Of Rescue

1David spoke the words of this song to the LORD when the LORD rescued him from the hands of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. 2He said:
“The LORD is my rock and my fortress [on the mountain] and my rescuer;
3My God, my rock, in whom I take refuge;
My shield and the horn of my salvation, my stronghold and my refuge,
My Savior—You save me from violence.
4“I call on the LORD, who is worthy to be praised,
And I am saved from my enemies.
5“For the waves of death encompassed me;
The torrents of destruction overwhelmed and terrified me.
6“The cords of Sheol surrounded me;
The snares of death confronted me.
7“In my distress I called upon the LORD;
I cried out to my God,
And from His temple [in the heavens] He heard my voice;
My cry for help came into His ears.
8“Then the earth shook and quaked,
The foundations of the heavens trembled
And were shaken, because He was angry.
9“Smoke went up out of His nostrils,
And devouring fire from His mouth;
Coals were kindled by it.
10“He bowed the heavens also, and came down
With thick darkness under His feet.
11“He rode on a cherub and flew;
He appeared upon the wings of the wind.
12“He made darkness canopies around Him,
A mass of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
13“Out of the brightness before Him
Coals of fire were set aflame.
14“The LORD thundered from heaven,
And the Most High uttered His voice.
15“He sent out arrows and scattered them;
Lightning, and confused them.
16“The channels of the sea appeared,
The foundations of the world were uncovered
At the rebuke of the LORD,
At the blast of the breath of His nostrils.
17“He sent from above, He took me;
He drew me out of great waters.
18“He rescued me from my strong enemy,
From those who hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
19“They came upon me in the day of my calamity,
But the LORD was my support.
20“He also brought me out to an open place;
He rescued me because He delighted in me.
21“The LORD has dealt with me according to my righteousness;
According to the cleanness of my hands He has rewarded me.
22“For I have kept the ways of the LORD,
And have not acted wickedly against my God.
23“For all His judgments (legal decisions) were before me,
And from His statutes I did not turn aside.
24“I was also blameless before Him,
And kept myself from wrongdoing.
25“Therefore the LORD has rewarded me according to my righteousness,
According to my cleanness in His sight.
26“With the loving and loyal You show Yourself loving and loyal,
With the blameless You show Yourself blameless.
27“With the pure You show Yourself pure,
With the perverted You show Yourself astute.
28“And You save the afflicted people;
But Your eyes are on the haughty whom You abase (humiliate).
29“For You, O LORD, are my lamp;
The LORD illumines and dispels my darkness.
30“For by You I can run upon a troop;
By my God I can leap over a wall.
31“As for God, His way is blameless and perfect;
The word of the LORD is tested.
He is a shield to all those who take refuge and trust in Him.
32“For who is God, besides the LORD?
And who is a rock, besides our God?
33“God is my strong fortress;
He sets the blameless in His way.
34“He makes my feet like the doe’s feet [firm and swift];
He sets me [secure and confident] on my high places.
35“He trains my hands for war,
So that my arms can bend (pull back) a bow of bronze.
36“You have also given me the shield of Your salvation,
And Your help and gentleness make me great.
37“You enlarge my steps under me,
And my feet have not slipped.
38“I pursued my enemies and destroyed them,
And I did not turn back until they were consumed (eliminated).
39“I consumed them and shattered them, so that they did not rise;
They fell under my feet.
40“For You have surrounded me with strength for the battle;
You have subdued under me those who stood against me.
41“You have also made my enemies turn their backs to me [in retreat],
And I destroyed those who hated me.
42“They looked, but there was no savior for them—
Even to the LORD [they looked], but He did not answer them.
43“Then I beat them as [small as] the dust of the earth;
I crushed and stamped them as the mire (dirt, mud) of the streets.
44“You also have rescued me from strife with my [own] people;
You have kept me as the head of the nations.
People whom I have not known served me.
45“Foreigners pretend obedience to me;
As soon as they hear [me], they obey me.
46“Foreigners lose heart;
They come trembling out of their strongholds.
47“The LORD lives, and blessed be my rock,
And exalted be my God, the rock of my salvation.
48“It is God who executes vengeance for me,
And brings down [and disciplines] the peoples under me,
49Who also brings me out from my enemies.
You even lift me above those who rise up against me;
You rescue me from the violent man.
50“For this I will give thanks and praise You, O LORD, among the nations;
I will sing praises to Your name.
51“He is a tower of salvation and great deliverance to His king,
And shows lovingkindness to His anointed,
To David and his offspring forever.”

2 Samuel 23
David’s Last Song

1Now these are the last words of David.
David the son of Jesse declares,
The man who was raised on high declares,
The anointed of the God of Jacob,
And the sweet psalmist of Israel,
2“The Spirit of the LORD spoke by me,
And His word was on my tongue.
3“The God of Israel,
The Rock of Israel spoke to me,
‘He who rules over men righteously,
Who rules in the fear of God,
4Is like the morning light when the sun rises,
A morning without clouds,
When the fresh grass springs out of the earth
Through sunshine after rain.’
5“Truly is not my house so [blessed] with God?
For He has made an everlasting covenant with me,
Ordered in all things, and secured.
For will He not cause to grow and prosper
All my salvation and my every wish?
Will He not make it grow and prosper?
6“But the wicked and worthless are all to be thrown away like thorns,
Because they cannot be taken with the hand;
7“But the man who touches them
Must be armed with iron and the shaft of a spear,
And they are utterly burned and consumed by fire in their place.”

His Mighty Men 8These are the names of the mighty men (warriors) whom David had: Josheb-basshebeth, a Tahchemonite, chief of the captains, also called Adino the Eznite (spear) because of the eight hundred men killed [by him] at one time. 9Next to him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the son of Ahohi. He was one of the three mighty men with David when they taunted and defied the Philistines assembled there for battle, and the men of Israel had gone. 10Eleazar stood up and struck down the Philistines until his hand was weary and clung to the sword. The LORD brought about a great victory that day; the people returned after him only to take the spoil [of the slain].

11Next to Eleazar was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. The Philistines were gathered into an army where there was a plot of ground full of lentils, and the people [of Israel] fled from the Philistines. 12But he took his stand in the center of the plot and defended it and struck down the Philistines; and the LORD brought about a great victory.

13Then three of the thirty chief men went down and came to David at harvest time in the cave of Adullam, while an army of Philistines was encamped in the Valley of Rephaim. 14David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem. 15And David had a craving and said, “Oh that someone would give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!” 16So the three mighty men broke through the camp of the Philistines, and drew water from the well of Bethlehem by the gate, and carried and brought it to David. But he would not drink it, but poured it out [in worship] to the LORD. 17And he said, “Far be it from me, O LORD, that I should drink this. [Is it not the same as] the blood of the men who went at the risk of their lives?” So he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.

18Now Abishai the brother of Joab the son of Zeruiah was chief of the thirty. He wielded his spear against three hundred men and killed them, and gained a reputation beside the three. 19He was the most honored of the thirty, so he became their commander; however, he did not attain to the [greatness of the] three.

20Then Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done many notable acts, killed two [famous] warriors of Moab. He also went down and killed a lion in the middle of a pit on a snowy day. 21And he killed an Egyptian, an impressive and handsome man. The Egyptian had a spear in his hand, but Benaiah went down to him with a club, snatched the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand and killed the man with his own spear. 22These things Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did, and gained a reputation beside the three mighty men. 23He was honored among the thirty, but he did not attain to the [greatness of the] three. David appointed him over his guard.

24Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; then Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem, 25Shammah of Harod, Elika of Harod, 26Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh of Tekoa, 27Abiezer of Anathoth, Mebunnai the Hushathite, 28Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai of Netophah, 29Heleb the son of Baanah of Netophah, Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the Benjamites, 30Benaiah of Pirathon, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash, 31Abi-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite, 32Eliahba of Shaalbon, the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, 33Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Ararite, 34Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai the son of Maacah, Eliam the son of Ahithophel of Giloh, 35Hezro (Hezrai) of Carmel, Paarai the Arbite, 36Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite, 37Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai of Beeroth, armor bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah, 38Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, 39Uriah the Hittite—thirty-seven in all.

2 Samuel 24
The Census Taken

1Now again the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He incited David against them to say, “Go, count [the people of] Israel and Judah.” 2So the king said to Joab the commander of the army who was with him, “Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan [in the north] to Beersheba [in the south], and conduct a census of the people, so that I may know the number of the people.” 3But Joab said to the king, “May the LORD your God add to the people a hundred times as many as there are, and let the eyes of my lord the king see it; but why does my lord the king want to do this thing?” 4Nevertheless, the king’s word prevailed against Joab and the commanders of the army. So they went from the king’s presence to take a census of the people of Israel. 5They crossed over the Jordan and camped in Aroer, on the south side of the city which is in the middle of the river valley [of the Arnon] toward Gad, and on toward Jazer. 6Then they came to Gilead and to the land of Tahtim-hodshi, and they came to Dan-jaan and around to Sidon, 7and they came to the stronghold of Tyre and to all the cities of the Hivites and Canaanites, and they went out to the south of Judah, to Beersheba. 8So when they had gone about through all the land [taking the census], they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days. 9And Joab gave the sum of the census of the people to the king. In Israel there were 800,000 valiant men who drew the sword, and the men of Judah were 500,000.

10But David’s heart (conscience) troubled him after he had counted the people. David said to the LORD, “I have sinned greatly in what I have done. But now, O LORD, please take away the sin of Your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.” 11When David got up in the morning, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Gad, David’s seer, saying, 12“Go and say to David, ‘Thus says the LORD, “I am giving you three choices; select one of them for yourself, and I will do it to you.”’” 13So Gad came to David and told him, and said to him, “Shall seven years of famine come to you in your land? Or will you flee three months before your enemies as they pursue you? Or shall there be three days of pestilence (plague) in your land? Now consider this and decide what answer I shall return to Him who sent me.” 14Then David said to Gad, “I am in great distress. Let us fall into the hands of the LORD, for His mercies are great, but do not let me fall into the hands of man.”

Pestilence Sent 15So the LORD sent a pestilence (plague) [lasting three days] upon Israel from the morning until the appointed time, and seventy thousand men of the people from Dan to Beersheba died. 16When the [avenging] angel stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD relented from the disaster and said to the angel who destroyed the people, “It is enough! Now relax your hand.” And the angel of the LORD was by the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite. 17When David saw the angel who was striking down the people, he spoke to the LORD and said, “Behold, I [alone] am the one who has sinned and done wrong; but these sheep (people of Israel), what have they done [to deserve this]? Please let Your hand be [only] against me and my father’s house (family).”

David Builds an Altar 18Then Gad [the prophet] came to David that day and said to him, “Go up, set up an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite [where you saw the angel].” 19So David went up according to Gad’s word, as the LORD commanded. 20Araunah looked down and saw the king and his servants crossing over toward him; and he went out and bowed before the king with his face toward the ground. 21Araunah said, “Why has my lord the king come to his servant?” And David said, “To buy the threshing floor from you, to build an altar to the LORD, so that the plague may be held back from the people.” 22Araunah said to David, “Let my lord the king take and offer up whatever seems good to him. Look, here are oxen for the burnt offering, and threshing sledges and the yokes of the oxen for the wood. 23“All of this, O king, Araunah gives to the king.” And Araunah said to the king, “May the LORD your God be favorable to you.” 24But the king said to Araunah, “No, but I will certainly buy it from you for a price. I will not offer burnt offerings to the LORD my God which cost me nothing.” So David purchased the threshing floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver. 25David built an altar to the LORD there, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So the LORD was moved [to compassion] by [David’s] prayer for the land, and the plague was held back from Israel.

1 Kings 1
David In Old Age

1Now King David was old, advanced in years; they covered him with clothes, but he could not get warm. 2So his servants said to him, “Let a young virgin be found for my lord the king and let her attend him and become his nurse; let her lie against your chest, so that my lord the king may feel warm.” 3So they searched for a beautiful girl throughout the territory of Israel, and found Abishag the Shunammite, and brought her to the king. 4The girl was very beautiful; and she became the king’s nurse and served him, but the king was not intimate with her.

5Then Adonijah the son of [David’s wife] Haggith exalted himself, saying, “I [the eldest living son] will be king.” So [following Absalom’s example] he prepared for himself chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him. 6His father [David] had never rebuked him at any time by asking, “Why have you done this?” Adonijah was also a very handsome man, and he was born after Absalom. 7He had conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah [David’s half sister] and with Abiathar the priest; and they followed Adonijah and helped him. 8But Zadok the priest, Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, Nathan the prophet, Shimei, Rei, and David’s most formidable warriors did not side with Adonijah [in his desire to become king].

9Adonijah sacrificed sheep and oxen and fattened steers by the Stone of Zoheleth, which is beside [the well] En-rogel; and he invited all his brothers, the king’s sons, and all the men of Judah, the king’s servants [to this feast]. 10But he did not invite Nathan the prophet, Benaiah, the most formidable warriors, or his brother Solomon.

Nathan and Bathsheba 11Then Nathan spoke to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, “Have you not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith has become king, and David our lord does not know about it? 12Come now, please let me advise you and save your life and the life of your son Solomon. 13“Go at once to King David and say to him, ‘Did you not, my lord, O king, swear to your maidservant, saying, “Solomon your son shall certainly be king after me, and he shall sit on my throne”? Why then has Adonijah become king?’ 14“Behold, while you are still there speaking with the king, I will come in after you and confirm your words.”

15So Bathsheba went to the king in his bedroom. Now the king was very old and weak, and Abishag the Shunammite was attending the king. 16So Bathsheba bowed down and paid respect to the king. And the king said, “What do you wish?” 17She said to him, “My lord, you swore by the LORD your God to your maidservant, saying, ‘Solomon your son shall certainly be king after me and he shall sit on my throne.’ 18But now, behold, Adonijah is [acting as] king; and now [as things stand], my lord the king, you do not know it. 19He has sacrificed oxen and fattened steers and sheep in abundance, and has invited all the king’s sons and Abiathar the priest and Joab the commander of the army [to a feast], but he did not invite your servant Solomon. 20Now as for you, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are on you [waiting for you] to tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him. 21“Otherwise it will come about when my lord the king lies down [in death] with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon will be considered political enemies.”

22While she was still speaking with the king, Nathan the prophet came in. 23The king was told, “Here is Nathan the prophet.” And when he came before the king, he bowed before the king with his face to the ground. 24Then Nathan said, “My lord the king, have you said, ‘Adonijah shall be king after me, and he shall sit on my throne’? 25Because he has gone down today [to En-Rogel] and has sacrificed oxen and fattened steers and sheep in abundance, and has invited all the king’s sons, the commanders of the army and Abiathar the priest [to this feast]; and [right now] they are eating and drinking in his presence; and they say, ‘Long live King Adonijah!’ 26But he has not invited me, your servant, nor Zadok the priest, nor Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, nor your servant Solomon. 27“If this thing has been done by my lord the king, why have you not shown your servants who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?”

28King David answered, “Call Bathsheba to me.” And she came into the king’s presence and stood before him. 29Then the king swore an oath and said, “As the LORD lives, who has redeemed my soul from all distress, 30even as I swore to you by the LORD, the God of Israel, saying, ‘Solomon your son shall certainly be king after me, and he shall sit on my throne in my place’; I will indeed do so this very day.” 31Bathsheba bowed down with her face to the ground, and laid herself face down before the king and said, “May my lord King David live forever!”

32Then King David said, “Call Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada to me.” And they came before the king. 33The king told them, “Take the servants of your lord with you and have Solomon my son ride on my own mule, and bring him down to [the spring at] Gihon [in the Kidron Valley]. 34Let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there as king over Israel. Then blow the trumpet and say, ‘Long live King Solomon!’ 35“Then you shall come up [to Jerusalem] after him, and he shall come and sit on my throne and he shall reign as king in my place; for I have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and Judah.” 36Benaiah [the overseer of the king’s bodyguards], the son of Jehoiada answered the king and said, “Amen! (So be it!) May the LORD, the God of my lord the king, say so too. 37“Just as the LORD has been with my lord the king, so may He be with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord King David!”

Solomon Anointed King 38So Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the Cherethites, and the Pelethites [the king’s bodyguards] went down [from Jerusalem] and had Solomon ride on King David’s mule, and brought him to [the spring at] Gihon. 39Zadok the priest took a horn of [olive] oil from the [sacred] tent and anointed Solomon. They blew the trumpet, and all the people said, “Long live King Solomon!” 40All the people went up after him, and they were playing on flutes and rejoicing with great joy, so that the earth shook and seemed to burst open with their [joyful] sound.

41Now Adonijah and all the guests who were with him heard it as they finished eating. When Joab heard the trumpet sound, he said, “Why is the city in such an uproar?” 42While he was still speaking, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest arrived. And Adonijah said, “Come in, for you are a valiant and trustworthy man and you bring good news.” 43But Jonathan replied to Adonijah, “No, on the contrary, our lord King David has made Solomon king! 44The king has sent him with Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the Cherethites, and the Pelethites; and they have had him ride on the king’s [own royal] mule. 45Also, Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon, and they have come up from there celebrating, so the city is in an uproar. This is the noise which you have heard. 46Besides, Solomon has taken his seat on the throne of the kingdom. 47Moreover, the king’s servants came to bless (congratulate) our lord King David, saying, ‘May your God make the name of Solomon better (more famous) than your name and make his throne greater than your throne.’ And the king bowed himself [before God] upon the bed. 48“The king has also said this: ‘Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who has granted one [of my descendants] to sit on my throne today and allowed my eyes to see it.’”

49Then all Adonijah’s guests were terrified [of being branded as traitors] and stood up and left the feast, and each one went on his way. 50And Adonijah feared Solomon, and he got up and went [to the tabernacle on Mt. Zion] and took hold of the horns of the altar [seeking asylum]. 51Now Solomon was told, “Behold, Adonijah is afraid of King Solomon, and behold, he has grasped the horns of the altar [seeking God’s protection], saying, ‘King Solomon must swear to me today that he will not kill his servant with the sword.’” 52Solomon said, “If he [proves he] is a worthy man, not even one of his hairs shall fall to the ground; but if wickedness is found in him, he shall die.” 53So King Solomon sent [soldiers], and they brought Adonijah down from the altar [that was in front of the tabernacle]. And he came and bowed down to King Solomon, and Solomon said to him, “Go to your house.”

1 Kings 2
David’s Charge To Solomon

1When David’s time to die approached, he gave instructions to Solomon his son, saying, 2“I am going the way of all the earth [as dust to dust]. Be strong and prove yourself a man. 3Keep the charge of the LORD your God, [that is, fulfill your obligation to] walk in His ways, keep His statutes, His commandments, His precepts, and His testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses, so that you may succeed in everything that you do and wherever you turn, 4so that the LORD may fulfill His promise concerning me, saying, ‘If your sons are careful regarding their way [of life], to walk before Me in truth with all their heart and mind and with all their soul, you shall not fail to have a man (descendant) on the throne of Israel.’

5Now you also know what Joab the son of Zeruiah [my sister] did to me, and what he did to the two commanders of the armies of Israel, to Abner the son of Ner and to Amasa the son of Jether, [both of] whom he murdered; avenging the blood of war in [a time of] peace. And he put the [innocent] blood of war [of Abner and Amasa] on his belt that was around his waist, and on his sandals on his feet. 6So act in accordance with your wisdom, but do not let his gray head go down to Sheol (the place of the dead) in peace. 7But be gracious and kind to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be among those who [have the honor to] eat at your table; for they met me [with kindness] when I fled from your brother Absalom. 8And look, you have with you Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite of Bahurim; he is the one who cursed me with a sinister curse the day I went to Mahanaim. But he came down to meet me at the Jordan [on my return], and I swore to him by the LORD, saying, ‘I will not put you to death with the sword.’ 9“But now do not let him go unpunished, for you are a wise man; and you will know what to do to him, and you will bring his gray head down to Sheol [covered] with blood.”

Death of David 10So David lay down with his fathers [in death] and was buried in the City of David. 11The time that David reigned over Israel was forty years: he reigned seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem. 12Then Solomon sat on the throne of David his father, and his kingdom was firmly established.

13Now Adonijah the son of [David and] Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. She said, “Do you come in peace?” And he said, “In peace.” 14Then he said, “I have something to say to you.” And she said, “Speak.” 15So he said, “You know that the kingdom belonged to me [as the eldest living son] and all Israel looked to me and expected me to be king. However, the kingdom has passed [from me] and became my brother’s, for it was his from the LORD. 16“So now I am making one request of you; do not refuse me.” And she said to him, “Speak.” 17He said, “Please speak to King Solomon, for he will not refuse you; ask that he may give me Abishag the Shunammite as a wife.” 18Bathsheba replied, “Very well; I will speak to the king for you.”

Adonijah Executed 19So Bathsheba went to King Solomon to speak to him for Adonijah. And the king rose to meet her, bowed before her, and sat down on his throne; then he had a throne set for her, the king’s mother, and she sat on his right. 20Then she said, “I am making one small request of you; do not refuse me.” And the king said to her, “Ask, my mother, for I will not refuse you.” 21So she said, “Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to your brother Adonijah as a wife.” 22King Solomon answered and said to his mother, “And why are you asking for Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? Ask the kingdom for him also—since he is my older brother—[ask it] for him and for Abiathar the priest and Joab the son of Zeruiah [his supporters]!” 23Then King Solomon swore by the LORD, saying, “May God do the same to me, and more also, if Adonijah has not requested this [deplorable] thing against his own life. 24“So now, as the LORD lives, who has established me and set me on the throne of David my father, and who has made me a house as He promised, Adonijah shall indeed be put to death today.” 25So King Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and he struck Adonijah and he died.

26Then the king said to Abiathar the priest, “Go to Anathoth to your own fields, for you certainly deserve to die; but I will not put you to death this day, because you carried the ark of the Lord GOD before my father David, and you suffered everything that my father endured.” 27So Solomon dismissed Abiathar [a descendant of Eli] from being priest to the LORD, fulfilling the word of the LORD, which He had spoken concerning the house (descendants) of Eli in Shiloh.

Joab Executed 28Now the news reached Joab, for Joab had supported and followed Adonijah, although he had not followed Absalom. So Joab fled to the [sacred] tent of the LORD and took hold of the horns of the altar [to seek asylum]. 29King Solomon was told that Joab had fled to the tent of the LORD and was at that moment beside the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, “Go, strike him down.” 30So Benaiah came to the tent of the LORD and told Joab, “This is what the king commands, ‘Come out of there.’” But Joab said, “No, for I will die here.” Then Benaiah brought word to the king again, saying, “This is what Joab said, and this is how he answered me.” 31The king said to him, “Do as he has said. Strike him down and bury him, so that you may remove from me and from my father’s house the innocent blood which Joab shed. 32The LORD will return his bloody deeds upon his own head, because he struck down two men more righteous and honorable than he and killed them with the sword, without my father David knowing: Abner the son of Ner, commander of the army of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether, commander of the army of Judah. 33“So shall their blood return on the head of Joab and the heads of his descendants forever. But for David, his descendants, his house, and his throne, may there be peace from the LORD forever.” 34So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up [to the tabernacle] and struck and killed Joab, and he was buried at his own house in the wilderness [of Judah]. 35The king appointed Benaiah the son of Jehoiada over the army in Joab’s place, and appointed Zadok the priest in place of Abiathar.

Shimei Executed 36Now the king sent word and called for Shimei and said to him, “Build yourself a house in Jerusalem and live there. Do not go from there to any other place. 37“For on the day you leave and cross over the Brook Kidron, know for certain that you shall surely die; your blood shall be on your own head.” 38Shimei said to the king, “The word (ruling) is good. As my lord the king has said, so will your servant do.” So Shimei lived in Jerusalem for many days.

39But it happened after three years, that two of Shimei’s servants ran away to Achish the son of Maacah, the king of Gath. And Shimei was told, “Behold, your [runaway] servants are in Gath.” 40So Shimei arose, saddled his donkey, and went to Gath to [King] Achish to look for his servants. And Shimei went and brought them back from Gath. 41Now Solomon was told that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and had returned. 42So the king sent word and called for Shimei and said to him, “Did I not make you swear by the LORD and solemnly warn you, saying, ‘Know for certain that on the day you leave [Jerusalem] and go anywhere, you shall surely die’? And you said to me, ‘The word (ruling) I have heard is good.’ 43“Why then have you not kept the oath of the LORD, and the command which I gave you?” 44The king also said to Shimei, “You are aware in your own heart of all the evil you did to my father David; so the LORD shall return your evil on your own head. 45“But King Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the LORD forever.” 46So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and he went out and struck down Shimei, and he died.

So the kingdom was established in the hands of Solomon.

1 Kings 3
Solomon’s Rule Consolidated

1Now Solomon became a son-in-law to Pharaoh king of Egypt [and formed an alliance] by taking Pharaoh’s daughter [in marriage]. He brought her to the City of David [where she remained temporarily] until he had finished building his own house (palace) and the house of the LORD and the wall around Jerusalem. 2But [in the meantime] the people were still sacrificing [to God] on the high places (hilltops) [as the pagans did to their idols], for there was no [permanent] house yet built for the Name of the LORD.

3Now Solomon loved the LORD, walking [at first] in the statutes of David his father, except [for the fact that] he sacrificed and burned incense in the high places [ignoring the law that required all sacrifices to be offered at the tabernacle]. 4The king went to Gibeon [near Jerusalem, where the tabernacle and the bronze altar stood] to sacrifice there, for that was the great high place. Solomon offered a thousand burnt offerings on that altar. 5In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream at night; and God said, “Ask [Me] what I shall give you.” Solomon’s Prayer 6Then Solomon said, “You have shown Your servant David my father great lovingkindness, because he walked before You in faithfulness and righteousness and with uprightness of heart toward You; and You have kept for him this great lovingkindness, in that You have given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is today. 7So now, O LORD my God, You have made Your servant king in place of David my father; and as for me, I am but a little boy [in wisdom and experience]; I do not know how to go out or come in [that is, how to conduct business as a king]. 8Your servant is among Your people whom You have chosen, a great people who are too many to be numbered or counted. 9“So give Your servant an understanding mind and a hearing heart [with which] to judge Your people, so that I may discern between good and evil. For who is able to judge and rule this great people of Yours?”

God’s Answer 10Now it pleased the Lord that Solomon had asked this thing. 11God said to him, “Because you have asked this and have not asked for yourself a long life nor for wealth, nor for the lives of your enemies, but have asked for yourself understanding to recognize justice, 12behold, I have done as you asked. I have given you a wise and discerning heart (mind), so that no one before you was your equal, nor shall anyone equal to you arise after you. 13I have also given you what you have not asked, both wealth and honor, so that there will not be anyone equal to you among the kings, for all your days. 14“If you walk in My ways, keeping My statutes and My commandments, as your father David did, then I will lengthen your days.”

15Then Solomon awoke, and he realized that it was a dream. He came [back] to Jerusalem and stood before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; he offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and he prepared a feast for all his servants.

Solomon Wisely Judges 16Then two women who were prostitutes came to the king and stood before him. 17And the one woman said, “O my lord, this woman and I live in the same house; and I gave birth to a child while she was in the house. 18And on the third day after I gave birth, this woman also gave birth. And we were [alone] together; no one else was with us in the house, just we two. 19Now this woman’s son died during the night, because she lay on him [and smothered him]. 20So she got up in the middle of the night and took my son from [his place] beside me while your maidservant was asleep, and laid him on her bosom, and laid her dead son on my bosom. 21“When I got up in the morning to nurse my son, behold, he was dead. But when I examined him carefully in the morning, behold, it was not my son, the one whom I had borne.” 22Then the other woman said, “No! For my son is the one who is living, and your son is the dead one.” But the first woman said, “No! For your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one.” [This is how] they were speaking before the king.

23Then the king said, “This woman says, ‘This is my son, the one who is alive, and your son is the dead one’; and the other woman says, ‘No! For your son is the dead one, and my son is the one who is alive.’” 24Then the king said, “Bring me a sword.” So they brought a sword before the king. 25Then the king said, “Cut the living child in two, and give half to the one [woman] and half to the other.” 26Then the woman whose child was the living one spoke to the king, for she was deeply moved over her son, “O my lord, give her the living child, and by no means kill him.” But the other said, “He shall be neither mine nor yours; cut him!” 27Then the king said, “Give the first woman [who is pleading for his life] the living child, and by no means kill him. She is his mother.” 28When all [the people of] Israel heard about the judgment which the king had made, they [were in awe and reverently] feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was within him to administer justice.

1 Kings 4
Solomon’s Officials

1King Solomon was king over all [the people of] Israel. 2These were his [chief] officials: Azariah the son of Zadok was the high priest; 3Elihoreph and Ahijah the sons of Shisha, were scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder [of important events]; 4Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was in command of the army; Zadok and Abiathar were priests; 5Azariah the son of Nathan was in charge of the deputies; Zabud the son of Nathan was priest and was the king’s friend [and trusted advisor]; 6Ahishar was in charge of the household (palace); and Adoniram the son of Abda was in charge of the forced labor.

7Solomon had twelve deputies over all Israel, who secured provisions for the king and his household; each man had to provide for a month in the year. 8These were their names: Ben-hur, in the hill country of [the tribe of] Ephraim; 9Ben-deker in Makaz and Shaalbim and Beth-shemesh and Elon-beth-hanan; 10Ben-hesed, in Arubboth (to him belonged Socoh and all the land of Hepher); 11Ben-abinadab, in all the hills of Dor (Taphath, Solomon’s daughter, was his wife); 12Baana the son of Ahilud, in Taanach, Megiddo, and all Beth-shean which is beside Zarethan below Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah as far as beyond Jokmeam; 13Ben-geber, in Ramoth-gilead (the villages of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead belonged to him, also the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and bronze bars); 14Ahinadab the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim; 15Ahimaaz, in [the tribe of] Naphtali (he also married Basemath, Solomon’s daughter); 16Baana the son of Hushai, in [the tribe of] Asher and Bealoth; 17Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in [the tribe of] Issachar; 18Shimei the son of Ela, in [the tribe of] Benjamin; 19Geber the son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, the country of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of Bashan; and he was the only officer who was in the land.

Solomon’s Power, Wealth and Wisdom 20[The people of] Judah and Israel were as numerous as the sand that is in abundance by the sea; they were eating and drinking and rejoicing.

21Now Solomon reigned over all the kingdoms from the [Euphrates] River to the land of the Philistines and to the border of Egypt; they brought tribute (money) and served Solomon all the days of his life.

22Solomon’s food [for the royal household] for one day was thirty kors of finely milled flour, sixty kors of wheat flour, 23ten fat oxen, twenty pasture-fed oxen, a hundred sheep not counting fallow deer, gazelles, roebucks, and fattened fowl. 24For he was ruling over everything west of the [Euphrates] River, from Tiphsah to Gaza, over all the kings west of the [Euphrates] River; and he had peace on all sides around him. 25Judah and Israel lived in security, every man under his vine and fig tree [in peace and prosperity], from Dan [in the north] to Beersheba [in the south], during all the days of Solomon. 26Solomon also had 40,000 stalls of horses for his chariots, and 12,000 horsemen. 27Those deputies provided food for King Solomon and for all [the staff] who came to King Solomon’s table, each in his month; they let nothing be lacking. 28They also brought the barley and straw for the horses and swift steeds (warhorses, chargers) to the place where it was needed, each man according to his assignment.

29Now God gave Solomon [exceptional] wisdom and very great discernment and breadth of mind, like the sand of the seashore. 30Solomon’s wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the sons of the east and all the wisdom of Egypt. 31For he was wiser than all [other] men, [wiser] than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol. His fame was known in all the surrounding nations. 32He also spoke 3,000 proverbs, and his songs were 1,005. 33He spoke of trees, from the cedar which is in Lebanon to the hyssop that grows on the wall; he spoke also of animals, of birds, of creeping things, and fish. 34People came from all the peoples (nations) to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and from all the kings of the earth who had heard of his wisdom.

1 Kings 5
Alliance With King Hiram

1Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon when he heard that they had anointed him king in place of his father, for Hiram had always been a friend of David. 2Then Solomon sent word to Hiram, saying, 3“You know that David my father could not build a house (temple) for the Name (Presence) of the LORD his God because of the wars which surrounded him, until the LORD put his enemies under his feet. 4But now that the LORD my God has given me rest [from war] on every side, there is neither adversary nor misfortune [confronting me]. 5Behold, I intend to build a house (temple) to the Name of the LORD my God, just as the LORD said to my father David: ‘Your son whom I will put on your throne in your place shall build the house for My Name and Presence.’ 6“So now, command that they cut cedar trees from Lebanon for me, and my servants will join your servants, and I will give you whatever wages you set for your servants. For you know that there is no one among us who knows how to cut timber like the men of Sidon.”

7When Hiram heard the words of Solomon, he rejoiced greatly and said, “Blessed be the LORD this day, who has given David a wise son [to be king] over this great people.” 8So Hiram sent word to Solomon, saying, “I have heard the message which you sent to me; I will do everything you wish concerning the cedar and cypress timber. 9“My servants will bring the logs down from Lebanon to the [Mediterranean] sea, and I will have them made into rafts to go by sea to the place (port) that you direct me; then I will have them broken up there, and you shall carry them away. Then you shall return the favor by providing food for my household.” 10So Hiram gave Solomon all the cedar and cypress timber he desired, 11and Solomon gave Hiram 20,000 kors of wheat as food for his household, and 20 kors of pure [olive] oil. Solomon gave all these to Hiram each year. 12The LORD gave Solomon wisdom, just as He promised him; and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and the two of them made a treaty.

Conscription of Laborers 13King Solomon levied forced laborers from all Israel; and the forced laborers numbered 30,000 men. 14He sent them to Lebanon, 10,000 a month in shifts; one month they were in Lebanon and two months at home. Adoniram was in charge of the forced laborers. 15Solomon had 70,000 burden bearers (transporters) and 80,000 stonemasons in the hill country [of Judah], 16besides Solomon’s 3,300 chief deputies who were in charge of the project and who were in charge of the people doing the work. 17The king gave orders, and they quarried great stones, valuable stones, to lay the foundation of the house (temple) with cut stones. 18So Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders and the men of Gebal cut and chiseled the stones, and prepared the timber and the stones to build the house (temple).

1 Kings 6
The Building Of The Temple

1Now it came about in the four hundred and eightieth year after the Israelites came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, in the month of Ziv (April-May) which is the second month, that he began to build the Lord’s house (temple). 2The length of the house which King Solomon built for the LORD was sixty cubits (90 ft.), its width twenty (30 ft.), and its height thirty cubits (45 ft.). 3The porch in front of the main room of the house (temple) was twenty cubits long, corresponding to the width of the house, and its depth in front of the house was ten cubits. 4He also made framed (artistic) window openings for the house. 5Against the wall of the house he built extensions around the walls of the house, around both the main room (Holy Place) and the Holy of Holies; and he made side chambers all around. 6The lowest story was five cubits wide, the middle was six cubits wide, and the third was seven cubits wide; for he made offsets (niches) in the walls all around on the outside of the house so that the supporting beams would not be inserted into the walls of the house.

7While it was being built, the house was built of stone prepared and finished (precut) at the quarry, and no hammer, axe, or iron tool of any kind was heard in the house while it was under construction.

8The entrance to the lowest side chamber was on the right [or south] side of the house; and they would go up winding stairs to the middle [level], and from the middle to the third. 9So Solomon built the house (temple) and finished it, and roofed the house with beams and boards of cedar. 10Then he built the extensions [of rooms] against the entire house, each [story] five cubits high; and they were attached to the house with timbers of cedar.

11Now the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying, 12“Concerning this house which you are building, if you will walk in My statutes and execute My precepts and keep all My commandments by walking in them, then I will carry out My word (promises) with you which I made to David your father. 13“I will dwell among the sons (descendants) of Israel, and will not abandon My people Israel.”

14So Solomon built the house (temple) and finished it. 15He built the walls of the interior of the house [that is, the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies] with boards of cedar, from the floor of the house to the rafters of the ceiling. He overlaid the interior with wood, and he overlaid the floor of the house with boards of cypress. 16He built twenty cubits on the rear of the house with boards of cedar from the floor to the ceiling; he built its interior as the [inner] sanctuary, the Holy of Holies. 17The [rest of the] house, that is, the temple in front of the Holy of Holies, was forty cubits long. 18The cedar on the house within had wood carvings in the shape of gourds and open flowers. Everything was cedar; no stone was visible. 19Then he prepared the Holy of Holies within the house in order to put the ark of the covenant of the LORD there. 20The Holy of Holies was twenty cubits in length, twenty cubits in width, and twenty cubits in height (a cube), and he overlaid it with pure gold. He also overlaid the cedar altar [with gold]. 21Solomon overlaid the interior of the house with pure gold, and he drew chains of gold across the front of the Holy of Holies (inner sanctuary), and he overlaid it with gold. 22Then he overlaid the entire house with gold, until the whole house was finished. He also overlaid the entire [incense] altar which was by the Holy of Holies with gold.

23Within the Holy of Holies he made two cherubim (sculptured figures) of olive wood, each ten cubits high. 24One wing of the cherub was five cubits long, and the other wing was also five cubits long; it was ten cubits from the tip of one wing to the tip of the other. 25The [wingspan of the] other cherub was also ten cubits. The measurements and cut (shape) of the two cherubim were the same; 26the height of the one cherub was ten cubits, as was the other. 27He put the cherubim [above the ark] inside the innermost room of the house, and their wings were spread out so that the wing of the one touched one wall, and the wing of the other cherub was touching the other wall; and their inner wings were touching each other in the middle of the house. 28Solomon also overlaid the cherubim with gold.

29He carved all the walls of the house all around with carved engravings of cherubim, palm-shaped decorations, and open flowers, [both] the inner and the outer sanctuaries. 30He overlaid the floor of the house with gold, [both] the inner and outer sanctuaries.

31For the entrance of the Holy of Holies he made two [folding] doors of olive wood, the lintel (header above the door) and five-sided doorposts (frames). 32So he made two doors of olive wood, and he carved on them carvings of cherubim, palm-shaped decorations, and open flowers; and overlaid them with gold; and he hammered out overlays of gold on the cherubim and palm decorations.

33Also he made for the entrance of the [outer] sanctuary (the Holy Place) four-sided doorposts (frames) of olive wood 34and two doors of cypress wood; the two leaves of the one door turned on pivots and were folding, and the two leaves of the other door also turned on pivots. 35He carved cherubim, palm-shaped decorations, and open flowers on the doors, and overlaid them with gold evenly applied on the carved work. 36He built the inner courtyard with three rows of cut stone and a row of cedar beams.

37In the fourth year [of King Solomon’s reign] the foundation of the LORD’S house was laid, in the [second] month, Ziv (April-May). 38In the eleventh year [of King Solomon’s reign] in the month of Bul (October-November), that is, the eighth month, the house was finished throughout all its parts and in accordance with all its specifications. So he built it in seven years.

1 Kings 7
Solomon’s Palace

1Now Solomon built his own house (palace) in thirteen years, and he finished all of his house [in that time]. 2He also built the House of the Forest of Lebanon; its length was a hundred cubits (150 ft.), its width fifty cubits (75 ft.), and its height thirty cubits (45 ft.), upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars. 3And it was covered with cedar [as a roof] on the supporting beams that were upon the forty-five pillars, fifteen in each row. 4There were artistic window frames in three rows, and window was opposite window in three tiers. 5All the doorways and doorposts [and windows] had squared [artistic] frames, and window was opposite window in three tiers.

6He also made the Hall of Pillars; its length was fifty cubits (75 ft.) and its width thirty cubits (45 ft.). There was a porch in front, and pillars and a threshold in front of them.

7He made the hall for the throne where he was to judge, the Hall of Judgment; it was paneled with cedar from [one] floor to [another] floor.

8His house where he was to live, the other courtyard behind the hall, was of similar workmanship. Solomon also made a house like this hall for Pharaoh’s daughter, whom he had married.

9All these were of expensive stones, of stone cut according to measure, sawed with saws, inside and outside; even from the foundation to the coping, and from the outside to the great courtyard.

10The foundation was of expensive stones, large stones, stones of ten cubits and stones of eight cubits. 11And above [the foundation] were expensive stones, stones cut according to measure, and cedar. 12So the great courtyard all around had three rows of cut stone and a row of cedar beams like the inner courtyard of the house of the LORD, and the porch of the house.

Hiram’s Work in the Temple 13Now King Solomon sent word and brought Hiram [a skilled craftsman] from Tyre. 14He was the son of a widow from the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a craftsman in bronze. Hiram was filled with wisdom, understanding, and skill for doing any [kind of] work in bronze. So he came to King Solomon and did all his [bronze] work.

15He cast the two pillars of bronze; the one pillar was eighteen cubits high, and a [measuring] line of twelve cubits measured the circumference of both. 16He also made two capitals (crowns) of cast bronze to put on the tops of the pillars; the height of one capital was five cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits. 17There were nets of network (lattice-work) and twisted threads (wreaths) of chainwork for the capitals which were on the tops of the pillars, seven for one capital and seven for the other. 18So Hiram made the pillars [in this manner], and two rows around on the one network to cover the capitals which were on the top of the pomegranates; and he did the same for the other capital. 19The capitals which were upon the top of the pillars in the porch were of lily work (design), four cubits. 20The capitals were on the two pillars and also above and close to the rounded projection which was beside the network. There were two hundred pomegranates in rows around both capitals. 21Hiram set up the pillars at the porch of the temple; he set up the right pillar and named it Jachin (may he establish), and he set up the left pillar and named it Boaz (in it is strength). 22On the tops of the pillars was lily work (design). So the work of the pillars was finished.

23Now he made the Sea (basin) of cast metal, ten cubits from brim to brim, circular in form, five cubits high and thirty cubits in circumference. 24Under its brim were gourds encircling it ten to a cubit, completely surrounding the Sea; the gourds were in two rows, cast in one piece with it. 25It stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, three west, three south, and three east; the Sea was set on top of them, and all their rear parts pointed inward. 26It was a hand width thick, and its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It held two thousand baths.

27Then Hiram made ten bronze stands [for smaller basins]; the length of each stand was four cubits, its width was four cubits and its height was three cubits. 28This was the design of the stands: they had borders between the frames. 29On the borders between the frames were lions, oxen, and cherubim; and on the frames there was a pedestal above. Beneath the lions and oxen were borders of hanging work. 30Now each stand had four bronze wheels with bronze axles, and its four feet had supports [for a basin]. Beneath the basin were cast supports with borders at each side. 31Its opening inside the crown at the top measured a cubit, and its opening was round like the design of a pedestal, a cubit and a half. Also on its opening were carvings, and their borders were square, not round. 32Underneath the borders were four wheels, and the axles of the wheels were on the stand. And the height of a wheel was a cubit and a half. 33The wheels were made like a chariot wheel: their axles, their rims, their spokes, and their hubs were all cast. 34Now there were four supports at the four corners of each stand; the supports were part of the stand itself. 35On the top of the stand there was a circular piece half a cubit high, and on the top of the stand its supports and borders were part of it. 36And on the surface of its supports and its borders Hiram engraved cherubim, lions, and palm-shaped decorations, according to the [available] space for each, with borders all around. 37He made the ten stands like this: they all had one casting, one measure, and one form.

38Then he made ten basins of bronze; each basin held forty baths and was four cubits, and there was one basin on each of the ten stands. 39Then he placed the bases, five on the right [or south] side of the house and five on the left [or north] side; and he set the Sea [of cast metal] on the right side of the house toward the southeast.

40Now Hiram made the basins and the shovels and the bowls. So Hiram finished all the work which he did for King Solomon on the house of the LORD: 41the two pillars and the [two] bowls of the capitals which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals which were on top of the pillars; 42and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the tops of the pillars; 43the ten stands and the ten basins on the stands; 44one Sea (basin), and the twelve oxen under the Sea; 45the pails, the shovels, and the bowls; all these utensils which Hiram made for King Solomon in the house of the LORD were of polished bronze. 46In the plain of the Jordan [River] the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan. 47Solomon left all the utensils unweighed, because there were so many; the weight of the bronze could not be determined.

48Solomon made all the [other] furniture which was in the house of the LORD: the [incense] altar of gold; the table of gold on which was the bread of the Presence; 49the lampstands of pure gold, five on the right side and five on the left, in front of the Holy of Holies (inner sanctuary); with the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs of gold; 50the cups, snuffers, bowls, spoons, firepans—of pure gold; and the hinges of gold [both] for the doors of the inner house, the Holy of Holies, and for the doors of the house, the main room [the Holy Place].

51So all the work that King Solomon did on the house of the LORD was completed. Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated—the silver, the gold, and the utensils—and he put them in the treasuries of the LORD’S house.

1 Kings 8
The Ark Brought Into The Temple

1Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the tribes, the leaders of the fathers’ households of the sons of Israel, to King Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord from the City of David, which is Zion. 2All the men of Israel assembled before King Solomon at the feast in the month of Ethanim (September-October), that is, the seventh month. 3All the elders of Israel came, and the priests carried the ark. 4They brought up the ark of the LORD and the Tent of Meeting and all the holy utensils that were in the tent; the priests and the Levites brought them up. 5King Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, who had assembled before him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, so many that they could not be counted or numbered. 6Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of the LORD to its place, into the inner sanctuary of the house, into the Holy of Holies, under the wings of the cherubim. 7For the cherubim spread their two wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its [carrying] poles from above. 8The poles were so long that the ends of the poles were visible from the Holy Place that was in front of the Holy of Holies, but they were not visible from the outside; they are there to this day (the date of this writing). 9There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets of stone which Moses put there at Horeb (Sinai), where the LORD made a covenant with the Israelites when they came out of the land of Egypt. 10Now it happened that when the priests had come out of the Holy Place, the cloud filled the LORD’S house, 11so the priests could not stand [in their positions] to minister because of the cloud, for the glory and brilliance of the LORD had filled the LORD’S house (temple).

Solomon Addresses the People 12Then Solomon said,
“The LORD has said that He would dwell in the thick darkness [of the cloud].
13“I have certainly built You a lofty house,
A place for You to dwell in forever.”

14Then the king turned around and blessed all the assembly of Israel, while all the assembly of Israel was standing. 15He said, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke with His mouth to my father David and has fulfilled it with His hand, saying, 16‘Since the day that I brought My people Israel out of Egypt, I did not choose a [particular] city out of all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house so that My Name (Presence) would be in it, but I chose David to be over My people Israel.’ 17Now it was [determined] in the heart of my father David to build a house (temple) for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel. 18But the LORD said to my father David, ‘Because it was in your heart to build a house for My Name, you did well, in that it was in your heart. 19‘Nevertheless, you shall not build the house, but your son, who shall be born to you, it is he who shall build it for My Name [and My Presence].’ 20Now the LORD has fulfilled His word which He spoke; I have risen in the place of my father David and have taken my seat on the throne of Israel, just as the LORD promised, and have built the house (temple) for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel. 21“There I have made a place [in the Holy of Holies] for the ark, in which is the covenant (solemn agreement) of the LORD, which He made with our fathers when He brought them out of the land of Egypt.”

The Prayer of Dedication 22Then Solomon stood [in the courtyard] before the altar of the LORD in the presence of all the assembly of Israel and spread out his hands toward heaven. 23He said, “O LORD, the God of Israel, there is no God like You in heaven above or on earth below, who keeps the covenant and shows lovingkindness to Your servants who walk before You with all their heart; 24You who have kept what You promised to Your servant my father David. You have spoken with Your mouth and have fulfilled Your word with Your hand, as it is this day. 25Now therefore, O LORD, the God of Israel, keep for Your servant my father David that which You promised him when You said, ‘You shall not be without a man (descendant) to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your sons take heed to their way [of life] to walk before Me [according to my laws] as you have done.’ 26Now, O God of Israel, please let Your word which You have spoken to Your servant David my father be confirmed.

27But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, heaven and the highest heaven cannot contain You; how much less this house which I have built! 28Yet graciously consider the prayer of Your servant and his supplication, O LORD my God, to listen to the [loud] cry and to the prayer which Your servant prays before You today; 29that Your eyes may be open toward this house night and day, toward the place of which You have said, ‘My Name (Presence) shall be there,’ that You may listen to the prayer which Your servant shall pray toward this place. 30Listen to the prayer of Your servant and of Your people Israel which they pray toward this place. Hear in heaven, Your dwelling place; hear and forgive.

31“If a man sins against his neighbor and is made to take an oath [of innocence] and he comes to take the oath before Your altar in this house (temple), 32then hear from heaven and act and judge Your servants, condemning the wicked by bringing his guilt on his own head, and justifying the righteous by rewarding him in accordance with his righteousness.

33“When Your people Israel are defeated before an enemy because they have sinned against You, and then they turn to You again and praise Your Name and pray and ask for Your favor and compassion in this house (temple), 34then hear in heaven, and forgive the sin of Your people Israel, and bring them back to the land which You gave their fathers.

35“When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because they have sinned against You, and they pray toward this place and praise Your name and turn from their sin when You afflict them, 36then hear in heaven and forgive the sin of Your servants and of Your people Israel; indeed, teach them the good way in which they should walk (live). And send rain on Your land which You have given to Your people as an inheritance.

37“If there is famine in the land, or if there is pestilence (plague), blight, mildew, migratory locusts, or grasshoppers, if their enemy besieges them in the land of their cities, whatever affliction or plague, whatever sickness [there is], 38whatever prayer or pleading is made by any individual, or by Your people Israel, each knowing the affliction of his own heart, and spreading his hands out toward this house; 39then hear in heaven Your dwelling place, and forgive and act and give to each according to his ways, whose heart (mind) You know, for You and You alone know the hearts of all the children of men, 40so that they may fear You [with reverence and awe] all the days that they live in the land which You have given to our fathers.

41“Moreover, concerning a foreigner who is not of Your people Israel, but comes from a far (distant) country for the sake of Your name [to plead with You] 42(for they will hear of Your great name, Your strong hand [of power], and outstretched arm); when he comes and prays toward this house (temple), 43hear in heaven, Your dwelling place, and do according to all for which the foreigner calls upon (prays to) You, so that all peoples of the earth may know Your name and fear You [with reverence and awe], as do Your people Israel, and that they may know [without any doubt] that this house which I have built is called by Your name.

44“When Your people go out to battle against their enemy, by whatever way You send them, and they pray to the LORD toward the city which You have chosen and the house that I have built for Your Name and Presence, 45then hear in heaven their prayer and their pleading, and maintain their right and defend their cause.

46“When they sin against You (for there is no man who does not sin) and You are angry with them and hand them over to the enemy, so that they are carried away captive to the enemy’s land, [whether] far away or near; 47if they take it to heart in the land where they have been taken captive, and they repent and pray to You in the land of their captors, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong and we have acted wickedly;’ 48if they return to You with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies who have taken them captive, and they pray to You toward their land [of Israel] which You gave to their fathers, the city [of Jerusalem] which You have chosen, and the house which I have built for Your Name and Presence; 49then hear their prayer and their supplication in heaven Your dwelling place, and maintain their right and defend their cause, 50and forgive Your people who have sinned against You and all the transgressions which they have committed against You, and make them objects of compassion before their captors, that they will be merciful to them 51(for they are Your people and Your heritage, whom You brought out of Egypt, from the midst of the iron furnace [of slavery and oppression]), 52that Your eyes may be open to the supplication of Your servant and to the supplication of Your people Israel, to listen to them and be attentive to them whenever they call to You. 53“For You singled them out from all the peoples of the earth as Your heritage, just as You declared through Moses Your servant, when You brought our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord GOD.”

Solomon’s Benediction 54When Solomon finished offering this entire prayer and supplication to the LORD, he arose from before the LORD’S altar, where he had knelt down with his hands stretched toward heaven. 55And he stood and blessed all the assembly of Israel with a loud voice, saying,

56“Blessed be the LORD, who has given rest to His people Israel, in accordance with everything that He promised. Not one word has failed of all His good promise, which He spoke through Moses His servant. 57May the LORD our God be with us as He was with our fathers; may He not leave us nor abandon us [to our enemies], 58that He may guide our hearts to Himself, to walk in all His ways [following Him] and to keep His commandments, His statutes, and His precepts which He commanded our fathers. 59Let these words of mine, with which I have made supplication before the LORD, be near to the LORD our God day and night, so that He will maintain the cause and right of His servant and of His people Israel as each day requires, 60so that all the peoples of the earth may know that the LORD is God; there is no one else. 61“Therefore, your hearts are to be wholly devoted to the LORD our God, to walk in His statutes and to keep His commandments, as [you are doing] today.”

Dedicatory Sacrifices 62Then the king and all [the people of] Israel with him [repeatedly] offered sacrifice before the LORD. 63Solomon offered as peace offerings to the LORD: 22,000 oxen and 120,000 sheep. So the king and all the Israelites dedicated the house (temple) of the LORD. 64On that same day the king consecrated the middle of the courtyard that was in front of the house (temple) of the LORD; for he offered there the burnt offerings, the grain offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the bronze altar that was before the LORD was too small to hold [all] the burnt offerings, the grain offerings and the fat of the peace offerings.

65So at that time Solomon held the feast, and all Israel with him, a great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath [on the northern border of Israel] to the Brook of Egypt [at Israel’s southern border], before the LORD our God, for seven days and seven more days [beyond the prescribed period for the Feast of Booths], fourteen days in all. 66On the eighth (fifteenth) day he sent the people away and they blessed the king. Then they went to their tents joyful and in good spirits because of all the goodness which the LORD had shown to David His servant and Israel His people.

1 Kings 9
God’s Promise And Warning

1Now it happened when Solomon had finished building the house (temple) of the LORD and the king’s house (palace), and all else which he was pleased to do, 2that the LORD appeared to Solomon a second time, just as He had appeared to him at Gibeon. 3The LORD told him, “I have heard your prayer and supplication which you have made before Me; I have consecrated this house which you have built by putting My Name and My Presence there forever. My eyes and My heart shall be there perpetually. 4As for you, if you walk (live your life) before Me, as David your father walked, in integrity of heart and in uprightness, acting in accordance with everything that I have commanded you, and will keep My statutes and My precepts, 5then I will establish the throne of your kingdom over Israel forever, just as I promised your father David, saying, ‘You shall not be without a man (descendant) on the throne of Israel.’

6“But if you or your sons turn away from following Me, and do not keep My commandments and My statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods and worship them, 7then I will cut off Israel from the land which I have given them, and I will cast out of My sight the house which I have consecrated for My Name and Presence. Then Israel will become a proverb (a saying) and a byword (object of ridicule) among all the peoples. 8This house (temple) will become a heap of ruins; everyone who passes by will be appalled and sneer and say, ‘Why has the LORD done such a thing to this land and to this house?’ 9“And they [who know] will say, ‘Because they abandoned the LORD their God, who brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and they have chosen other gods and have worshiped and served them; that is the reason the LORD has brought on them all this adversity.’”

Cities Given to Hiram 10Now at the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the two houses, the temple of the LORD and the palace of the king 11(Hiram king of Tyre had supplied Solomon with as much cedar and cypress timber [from Lebanon] and gold as he desired), at that time King Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee (northern Israel). 12So Hiram came from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had given him, and they did not please him. 13He said, “What are these cities [good for] which you have given me, my brother?” So they have been called the land of Cabul (like nothing, unproductive) to this day. 14And Hiram sent to the king 120 talents of gold.

15Now this is the account of the forced labor which King Solomon conscripted to build the house of the LORD, his own house, the Millo (fortification), the wall of Jerusalem, [and the fortress cities of] Hazor, Megiddo, and Gezer. 16For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up and taken Gezer, burned it with fire and killed the Canaanites who lived in the city, and he had given it as a dowry to his daughter, Solomon’s wife. 17So Solomon rebuilt [and fortified] Gezer and Lower Beth-horon, 18Baalath and Tamar in the wilderness, in the land of Judah, 19and all the storage cities [for surplus provisions] which Solomon had, and the cities for his chariots and cities for his horsemen, and whatever it pleased Solomon to build in Jerusalem, in Lebanon, and in all the land under his rule. 20As for all the people who were left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, who were not of the sons (descendants) of Israel, 21their children who were left after them in the land, whom the Israelites were unable to completely destroy, from them Solomon levied (conscripted) forced laborers, even to this day (the date of this writing). 22But Solomon did not make slaves of the sons of Israel; for they were men of war (soldiers), his servants, his officers, his captains, his chariot commanders, and his horsemen.

23These were the chief officers who were over Solomon’s work, five hundred and fifty, who ruled over the people doing the work.

24As soon as Pharaoh’s daughter came up from the City of David to her house which Solomon had built for her, then he built the Millo (fortification).

25Three times a year [during the major annual festivals] Solomon offered burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built to the LORD, and he burned incense with them before the LORD. So he finished the house [of the LORD].

26King Solomon built a fleet of ships in Ezion-geber, which is near Eloth on the shore of the Red Sea (Sea of Reeds), in the land of Edom. 27And Hiram [king of Tyre] sent his servants with the fleet, sailors who knew the sea, along with the servants of Solomon. 28They came to Ophir and took four hundred and twenty talents of gold from there, and brought it to King Solomon.

1 Kings 10
The Queen Of Sheba

1Now when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the LORD, she came to test him with riddles. 2So she came to Jerusalem with a very large caravan (entourage), with camels carrying spices, a great quantity of gold, and precious stones. When she came to Solomon, she spoke with him about everything that was on her mind [to discover the extent of his wisdom]. 3Solomon answered all her questions; there was nothing hidden from the king which he did not explain to her. 4When the queen of Sheba had seen all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house (palace) which he had built, 5the food on his table, the seating of his servants (court officials), the attendance of his waiters and their attire, his cupbearers, his stairway by which he went up to the house (temple) of the LORD, she was breathless and awed [by the wonder of it all]. 6Then she told the king, “The report which I heard in my own land about your words and wisdom is true! 7I did not believe the report until I came and saw it with my own eyes. Behold, the half of it was not told to me. You exceed in wisdom and prosperity the report which I heard. 8How blessed (fortunate, happy) are your men! How blessed are these your servants who stand continually before you, hearing your wisdom! 9“Blessed be the LORD your God who delighted in you to set you on the throne of Israel! Because the LORD loved Israel forever, He made you king to execute justice and righteousness.” 10She gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold and a very great quantity of spices and precious stones. Never again did such an abundance of spices come in [to Israel] as that which the queen of Sheba gave King Solomon.

11Also the ships of Hiram, which brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir a great quantity of almug wood (sandalwood) and precious stones. 12From the almug wood (sandalwood) the king made pillars for the house of the LORD and for the king’s palace, and also lyres and harps for the singers. Such almug wood did not come in [to Israel] again, nor has it been seen to this day.

13King Solomon [in turn] gave to the queen of Sheba everything that she wanted, whatever she asked, besides what he gave to her from his royal bounty. So she returned to her own country, she and her servants.

Wealth, Splendor and Wisdom 14Now the weight of the gold that came to Solomon in one [particular] year was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold, 15besides the taxes from the traders and from the wares of the merchants, and [the tribute money] from all the kings of the Arabs (Bedouins) and the governors of the country. 16King Solomon made two hundred large shields of beaten (hammered) gold; six hundred shekels of gold went into each shield. 17He made three hundred smaller shields of beaten gold; three minas of gold went into each shield. The king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebanon [the king’s armory]. 18Also the king made a great throne of ivory and overlaid it with the finest gold. 19The throne had six steps, and a round top was attached to the throne from the back. On either side of the seat were armrests, and two lions stood beside the armrests. 20Twelve lions stood there, one on either end of each of the six steps; there was nothing like it made for any other kingdom. 21All King Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all vessels of the House of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure gold. None were of silver; it was not considered valuable in the days of Solomon. 22For the king had at sea the [large cargo] ships of Tarshish with the ships of Hiram. Once every three years the ships of Tarshish came bringing gold, silver, ivory, monkeys, and peacocks.

23So King Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in wealth and in wisdom. 24All the earth was seeking the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom which God had put in his mind. 25Every man brought a gift [of tribute]: articles of silver and gold, garments, weapons, spices, horses, and mules, so much year by year.

26Now Solomon collected chariots and horsemen; he had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horsemen, which he stationed in the chariot cities and with the king in Jerusalem. 27The king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars as plentiful as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland. 28Solomon’s horses were imported from Egypt and from Kue, and the king’s merchants acquired them from Kue, for a price. 29A chariot could be imported from Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty; and in the same way they exported them, by the king’s merchants, to all the kings of the Hittites and to the kings of Aram (Syria).

1 Kings 11
Solomon Turns From God

1Now king Solomon [defiantly] loved many foreign women along with the daughter of Pharaoh: Moabite, Ammonite, Edomite, Sidonian, and Hittite women, 2from the very nations of whom the LORD said to the Israelites, “You shall not associate with them, nor shall they associate with you, for the result will be that they will turn away your hearts to follow their gods.” Yet Solomon clung to these in love. 3He had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines, and his wives turned his heart away [from God]. 4For when Solomon was old, his wives turned his heart away after other gods; and his heart was not completely devoted to the LORD his God, as was the heart of his father David. 5For Solomon went after Ashtoreth, the [fertility] goddess of the Sidonians, and after Milcom the horror (detestable idol) of the Ammonites. 6Solomon did evil [things] in the sight of the LORD, and did not follow the LORD fully, as his father David had done. 7Then Solomon built a high place for [worshiping] Chemosh the horror (detestable idol) of Moab, on the hill which is east of Jerusalem, and for Molech the horror (detestable idol) of the sons of Ammon. 8And he did the same for all of his foreign wives, who burned incense and sacrificed to their gods.

9So the LORD became angry with Solomon because his heart was turned away from the LORD, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice, 10and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not follow other gods; but he did not observe (remember, obey) what the LORD had commanded. 11Therefore the LORD said to Solomon, “Because you have done this and have not kept My covenant and My statutes, which I have commanded you, I will certainly tear the kingdom away from you and give it to your servant. 12However, I will not do it in your lifetime, for the sake of your father David, but I will tear it out of the hand of your son (Rehoboam). 13“However, I will not tear away all the kingdom; I will give one tribe (Judah) to your son for the sake of My servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem which I have chosen.”

God Raises Adversaries 14Then the LORD stirred up an adversary against Solomon, Hadad the Edomite; he was of royal descent in Edom. 15For it came about, when David was in Edom, and Joab the commander of the army had gone up to bury those killed [in battle] and had struck down every male in Edom 16(for Joab and all [the army of] Israel stayed there six months, until he had killed every male in Edom), 17that Hadad escaped to Egypt, he and some Edomites from his father’s servants with him, while Hadad was [still] a little boy. 18They set out from Midian [south of Edom] and came to Paran, and took men with them from Paran and came to Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave [young] Hadad a house and ordered food and provisions for him and gave him land. 19Hadad found great favor with Pharaoh, so that he gave Hadad in marriage the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen. 20The sister of Tahpenes gave birth to Genubath, Hadad’s son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh’s house; and Genubath was in Pharaoh’s household among the sons of Pharaoh. 21But when Hadad heard in Egypt that David had died and that Joab the commander of the army was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, “Let me leave, so that I may go to my own country.” 22Then Pharaoh said to him, “But what have you lacked with me that now you ask to go to your own country?” He replied, “Nothing; nevertheless you must let me go.”

23God also stirred up another adversary for Solomon, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his master, Hadadezer king of Zobah. 24Rezon gathered men to himself and became leader of a marauding band, after David killed those in Zobah. They went to Damascus and stayed there and they reigned in Damascus. 25So Rezon was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, along with the evil that Hadad inflicted. Rezon hated Israel and reigned over Aram (Syria).

26Jeroboam, Solomon’s servant, the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zeredah whose mother’s name was Zeruah, a widow, also rebelled against the king. 27Now this is the reason why he rebelled against the king: Solomon built the Millo (fortification) and he repaired and closed the breach of the city of his father David. 28The man Jeroboam was a brave warrior and when Solomon saw that the young man was industrious, he put him in charge of all the forced labor of the house of Joseph. 29It came about at that time, when Jeroboam left Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite met him on the road. Now Ahijah had covered himself with a new cloak; and the two of them were alone in the field. 30Then Ahijah took hold of the new cloak which he was wearing and tore it into twelve pieces. 31He said to Jeroboam, “Take ten pieces for yourself; for thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, ‘Behold, I am going to tear the kingdom from the hand of Solomon and give you ten tribes— 32but he [and his descendants] shall have one tribe (Benjamin was annexed to Judah), for the sake of My servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel— 33because they have abandoned Me and have worshiped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the sons of Ammon; and they have not walked in My ways and followed My commandments, doing what is right in My sight and keeping My statutes and My ordinances as did his father David. 34‘However, I will not take the entire kingdom out of his hand; but I will make him ruler all the days of his life for the sake of My servant David, whom I chose because he kept My commandments and My statutes. 35‘But I will take the kingdom out of his son’s hand and give it to you: ten tribes. 36‘Yet to his son I will give one tribe, so that My servant David may have a lamp always before Me in Jerusalem, the city where I have chosen to put My Name and Presence. 37‘I will take you [Jeroboam], and you shall reign over whatever your soul desires; and you shall be king over Israel (the ten northern tribes). 38‘Then it shall be, that if you listen to all that I command you and walk in My ways, and do what is right in My sight, keeping and observing My statutes and My commandments, as My servant David did, then I will be with you and build you an enduring house, as I built for David, and I will give Israel to you. 39‘And in this way I will afflict the descendants of David for this (their sin), but not forever.’” 40So Solomon attempted to kill Jeroboam; but Jeroboam set out and escaped to Egypt, to Shishak king of Egypt, and stayed in Egypt until Solomon died.

The Death of Solomon 41The rest of the acts of Solomon—and all that he did, and his wisdom—are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon? 42The time Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years. 43And Solomon slept [in death] with his fathers and was buried in the city of his father David. Rehoboam his son reigned in his place.

1 Kings 12
King Rehoboam Acts Foolishly

1Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had come to Shechem to make him king. 2Now when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard about it, he was living in Egypt (for he was still in Egypt, where he had fled from King Solomon). 3So they sent word and called for him, and Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel came and spoke to Rehoboam, saying, 4“Your father made our yoke (burden) heavy; so now lighten the hard labor and the heavy yoke your father imposed on us, and we will serve you.” 5Rehoboam replied to them, “Leave for three days, then come back to me [for my decision].” So the people left.

6King Rehoboam consulted with the elders who had served and advised his father Solomon while he was still alive and said, “How do you advise me to answer this people?” 7They spoke to him, saying, “If you will be a servant to this people today, and will serve them and grant their request, and speak good words to them, then they will be your servants forever.” 8But he ignored the advice which the elders gave him and consulted the young men who grew up with him and served him. 9He said to them, “What do you advise that we answer this people who have said to me, ‘Lighten the yoke (burden) which your father put on us’?” 10The young men who had grown up with him answered, “This is what you should say to this people who told you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but as for you, make our yoke lighter’—say this to them: ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s loins [and my reign will be even more severe]. 11‘And now, whereas my father loaded you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.’”

12Jeroboam and all the people came back to Rehoboam on the third day, just as the king had instructed, saying, “Return to me on the third day.” 13The king answered the people harshly and ignored the advice which the elders had given him, 14and spoke to them in accordance with the advice of the young men, saying, “My father made your yoke heavy, but as for me, I will add to your yoke; my father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.” 15So the king did not listen to the people; for the situation was from the LORD, so that He might fulfill His word which He spoke through Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

The Kingdom Divided; Jeroboam Rules Israel 16So when all [the ten northern tribes of] Israel saw that the king did not listen to them, the people replied to the king, saying,
“What portion do we have in David?
We have no inheritance in the son of Jesse;
To your tents, O Israel!
Look now after your own house, David!”
Then Israel went back to their tents. 17But as for the sons (descendants) of Israel who lived in the cities of Judah [including Benjamin], Rehoboam reigned over them. 18Then King Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was in charge of the forced labor [to represent him], and all Israel stoned him to death. And King Rehoboam quickly mounted his chariot to escape to Jerusalem. 19So Israel (the ten northern tribes) has rebelled against the house (royal line) of David to this day (the date of this writing).

20It came about when all Israel heard that Jeroboam had returned, that they sent word and called him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. None followed the house of David except the tribe of Judah [including Benjamin].

21Now when Rehoboam arrived in Jerusalem, he assembled all the [fighting men from the] house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, 180,000 chosen warriors, to fight against the house of Israel to bring the kingdom back to Rehoboam the son of Solomon. 22But the word of God came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying, 23“Tell Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and all the house (fighting men) of Judah and Benjamin and the rest of the people, 24‘Thus says the LORD, “You shall not go up and fight against your brothers, the sons of Israel. Let every man return to his house, for this thing has come about from Me.”’” So they listened to the word of the LORD and returned to go home, in accordance with the word of the LORD.

Jeroboam’s Idolatry 25Then Jeroboam built Shechem [as his royal city] in the hill country of Ephraim and lived there. He went out from there and rebuilt Penuel [as a stronghold]. 26Jeroboam [doubted God’s promise to him and] said in his heart, “Now the kingdom will return to the house of David. 27“If these people go up to the house of the LORD in Jerusalem to offer sacrifices, then their heart will turn to their lord, to Rehoboam king of Judah; and they will kill me and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.” 28So the king took counsel [and followed bad advice] and made two calves of gold. And he said to the people, “It is too much for you to go [all the way] up to Jerusalem; behold your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.” 29He set the one [golden calf] in Bethel, and the other he put in Dan. 30Now this thing became a sin [for Israel]; because the people went to worship before the one [or the other of them] as far as Dan. 31And Jeroboam also made houses on high places, and he made priests from all people who were not of the sons (descendants) of Levi. 32Jeroboam held a feast on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, like the feast which is kept in Judah, and he went up to the altar; he did this in Bethel, sacrificing to the calves which he had made. And he stationed in Bethel the priests of the high places which he had made. 33So he went up to the altar which he had made in Bethel on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, in the month which he had devised in his own heart [in defiance of God’s commandments]; and he held a feast for the Israelites and he went up to the altar to burn incense [in defiance of God’s law.]

1 Kings 13
Jeroboam Warned, Stricken

1Now behold, there came a man of God from Judah to Bethel by the word (command) of the LORD, while Jeroboam was standing by the altar [which he had built] to burn incense. 2The man cried out against the [idolatrous] altar by the word of the LORD, “O altar, altar, thus says the Lord: ‘Behold, a son shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name; and on you shall he sacrifice [the bodies of] the priests of the high places who burn incense on you, and human bones shall be burned on you.’” 3And he gave a sign the same day, saying, “This is the sign which the LORD has spoken: ‘Behold, the altar shall be split apart and the ashes that are on it shall be poured out.’” 4When the king heard the words which the man of God cried out against the altar in Bethel, Jeroboam put out his hand from the altar, saying, “Seize him!” And his hand which he had put out against him withered, so that he was unable to pull it back to himself. 5The altar also was split apart and the ashes were poured out from the altar in accordance with the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the LORD. 6The king answered and said to the man of God, “Please entreat [the favor of] the LORD your God and pray for me, that my hand may be restored to me.” So the man of God entreated the LORD, and the king’s hand was restored to him and became as it was before. 7And the king said to the man of God, “Come home with me and refresh yourself, and I will give you a reward.” 8But the man of God said to the king, “Even if you were to give me half your house (wealth), I would not go with you, nor would I eat bread or drink water in this place. 9“For I was commanded by the word of the LORD, ‘You shall not eat bread or drink water, nor shall you return by the way you came.’” 10So he went another way and did not return by the way that he came to Bethel.

The Disobedient Prophet 11Now there was an old prophet living in Bethel; and his sons came and told him everything that the man of God had done that day in Bethel; they also told their father the words which he had spoken to the king. 12Their father asked them, “Which way did he go?” For his sons had seen which way the man of God who came from Judah had gone. 13He said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” So they saddled the donkey for him and he rode away on it, 14and he went after the man of God. And he found him sitting under an oak (terebinth) tree, and he said to him, “Are you the man of God who came from Judah?” And he said, “I am.” 15Then he said to him, “Come home with me and eat bread.” 16He said, “I cannot return with you nor go in with you, nor will I eat bread or drink water with you in this place. 17“For I was told by the word of the LORD, ‘You shall not eat bread nor drink water there, nor shall you return by going the way that you came.’” 18He answered him, “I too am a prophet, as you are; and an angel spoke to me by the word of the LORD, saying, ‘Bring him back with you to your house, so that he may eat bread and drink water.’” But he lied to him. 19So the man of God went back with him, and ate bread in his house and drank water.

20Now it happened as they were sitting at the table, that the word of the LORD came to the prophet who had brought him back. 21And he cried out to the man of God who had come from Judah, “Thus says the LORD, ‘Because you have disobeyed the word of the LORD and have not kept the commandment which the LORD your God commanded you, 22but have come back and have eaten bread and drunk water in the place of which the LORD said to you, “You shall not eat bread nor drink water”; your body shall not come to the tomb of your fathers (ancestors).’” 23After the prophet of the house had eaten bread and after he had drunk, he saddled the donkey for the prophet whom he had brought back. 24Now when he had gone, a lion met him by the road and killed him, and his body was thrown in the road, with the donkey standing beside it; the lion was also standing beside the body. 25And there were men passing by, and they saw the body thrown in the road, and the lion standing beside the body. So they came and told about it in the city [of Bethel] where the old prophet lived.

26When the prophet who had brought him back from the road heard about it, he said, “It is the man of God who was disobedient to the word of the LORD; therefore the LORD has given him to the lion, which has torn him and killed him, in accordance with the word of the LORD which He spoke to him.” 27And he said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” And they saddled it. 28And he went and found the body thrown on the road, and the donkey and the lion standing beside the body; the lion [miraculously] had not eaten the body or attacked the donkey. 29Then the prophet picked up the body of the man of God and laid it on the donkey and brought it back, and he came into the city (Bethel) of the old prophet to mourn and to bury him. 30And he laid the body in his own grave, and they mourned over him, saying, “Alas, my brother!” 31Then after he had buried him, he said to his sons, “When I am dead, bury me in the grave in which the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones. 32“For the words which he cried out by the word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel and against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria shall certainly come to pass.”

33After this event, Jeroboam [still] did not turn from his evil way, but again made priests for the high places from among all the people. He ordained anyone who was willing, so that there would be priests for the high places. 34And this thing (idol worship) became the sin of the house of Jeroboam to blot it out and eliminate it from the face of the earth.

1 Kings 14
Ahijah Prophesies Against The King

1At that time Abijah the son [and crown prince, heir] of Jeroboam became sick. 2Jeroboam said to his wife, “Please get up and disguise yourself, so that people will not know that you are Jeroboam’s wife, and go to Shiloh. Ahijah the prophet is there, the one who told me that I would be king over this people. 3“Take with you ten loaves of bread, some cakes, and a bottle of honey, and go to him. He will tell you what will happen to the boy.”

4Jeroboam’s wife did so. She got up and went [twenty miles] to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see, because his eyes were dim from old age. 5And the LORD said to Ahijah, “Behold, the wife of Jeroboam is coming to inquire of you about her son, because he is sick. You shall say such and such to her, for when she arrives, she will pretend to be another woman.”

6So when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet as she came in the doorway, he said, “Come in, wife of Jeroboam. Why do you pretend to be another woman? For I have been sent to you [by God] with a harsh message. 7Go, tell Jeroboam, ‘This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: Because I exalted you from among the people and made you leader over My people Israel, 8and tore the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it to you—but you have not been like My servant David, who kept My commandments and followed Me with all his heart, to do only what was right in My eyes, 9but have done more evil than all [the kings] who were before you; for you have gone and made for yourself other gods and molten images to provoke Me to anger, and have cast Me behind your back— 10therefore behold, I am bringing evil on the house (royal line) of Jeroboam, and I will cut off (destroy) from Jeroboam every male, both bond and free, in Israel, and will utterly sweep away the house of Jeroboam as one sweeps away dung until it is all gone. 11“The dogs will eat [the carcass of] anyone belonging to Jeroboam who dies in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat [the carcass of] anyone who dies in the field, for the LORD has spoken it.”’ 12Now as for you (Jeroboam’s wife), arise, go to your own house. When your feet enter the city, the child [Abijah] will die. 13All Israel shall mourn for him and bury him, for he alone of Jeroboam’s family will come to [be placed in] the grave, because in him there was found something good and pleasing toward the LORD, the God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam. 14Moreover, the LORD will raise up for Himself a king over Israel who will cut off the house (royal line) of Jeroboam this day and from now on.

15“The LORD will strike Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water; and He will uproot Israel from this good land which He gave to their fathers, and He will scatter them beyond the [Euphrates] River, because they have made their Asherim, provoking the LORD to anger. 16“He will give up Israel because of the sins of Jeroboam which he has committed, and with which he has made Israel sin [by leading them into idolatry].”

17So Jeroboam’s wife arose and left and came to Tirzah [the king’s residence]. As she was entering the threshold of the house, the child [Abijah] died. 18And all Israel buried him and mourned for him, in accordance with the word of the LORD which He spoke through His servant Ahijah the prophet.

19Now as for the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he made war and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel. 20The time that Jeroboam reigned was twenty-two years, and he slept with his fathers [in death]; and Nadab his son reigned in his place.

Rehoboam Misleads Judah 21Now Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the LORD had chosen from all the tribes of Israel in which to put His Name (Presence). His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonitess. 22And [the people of] Judah did evil in the sight of the LORD. They provoked Him to jealousy more than all that their fathers had done, with their sins which they had committed. 23For they also built for themselves high places [to worship idols] and sacred pillars and Asherim [for the goddess Asherah]. These were on every high hill and under every luxuriant tree. 24There were also male cult prostitutes in the land. They committed all the repulsive acts of the nations which the LORD dispossessed before the Israelites.

25Now in the fifth year of King Rehoboam, Shishak king of Egypt [Jeroboam’s brother-in-law] came up against Jerusalem. 26He took away the treasures of the house (temple) of the LORD and the treasures of the king’s house; he took away everything, he even took all the shields of gold which Solomon had made. 27So King Rehoboam made bronze shields to replace them and handed them over to the captains of the palace guard who guarded the doorway of the king’s house. 28And as often as the king went into the house of the LORD, the guards would carry them and bring them back into the guardroom.

29Now as for the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 30There was also war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. 31And Rehoboam slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried with his fathers in the City of David. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonitess. Abijam (Abijah) his son became king in his place.

1 Kings 15
Abijam Reigns Over Judah

1In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam the son of Nebat, Abijam became king over Judah. 2He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother was Maacah [grand]daughter of Abishalom (Absalom). 3He walked in all the sins [of idol worship] that his father [Rehoboam] committed before him; and his heart was not entirely devoted to the LORD his God, like the heart of his father (forefather) David. 4Nevertheless, for David’s sake the LORD his God gave him a lamp (descendant on the throne) in Jerusalem, setting up his son after him and establishing Jerusalem, 5because David did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, and had not turned aside from anything that He commanded him all the days of his life, except in the matter of [the betrayal of] Uriah the Hittite. 6There was war between Rehoboam [Abijam’s father] and Jeroboam all the days of Rehoboam’s life.

7Now as for the rest of the acts of Abijam and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam. Asa Succeeds Abijam 8Abijam slept with his fathers [in death] and they buried him in the City of David. Asa his son became king in his place.

9So in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Asa began to reign as king over Judah. 10He reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. His [great-grand]mother was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom (Absalom). 11Asa did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did his father (forefather) David. 12He expelled the male cult prostitutes (sodomites) from the land and removed all the idols that his fathers [Solomon, Rehoboam, and Abijam] had made. 13He also deposed his [great-grand]mother Maacah from being queen mother, because she had made a horrid (obscene, vulgar) image for [the goddess] Asherah. Asa cut down her horrid image, and burned it by the Brook Kidron. 14But the high places [of idol worship] were not removed. Nevertheless, Asa’s heart was entirely devoted to the LORD all his days. 15He brought the things which his father had dedicated and the things which he had dedicated into the house of the LORD—silver, gold, and utensils and accessories.

16Now there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days. 17Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah and fortified Ramah [north of Jerusalem], in order to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to Asa king of Judah. 18Then Asa took all the silver and gold left in the treasuries of the house of the LORD and the treasuries of the palace of the king and handed them over to his servants. And King Asa sent them to Ben-hadad the son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king of Aram (Syria), who lived in Damascus, saying, 19“Let there be a treaty between me and you, as there was between my father and your father. Behold, I have sent you a gift of silver and gold; go, break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.” 20So Ben-hadad listened to king Asa and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel, and conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth [the region of the Sea of Galilee], along with all the land of Naphtali. 21When Baasha heard about it, he stopped fortifying Ramah and stayed in Tirzah. 22Then King Asa made a proclamation to all Judah—none was exempt—and they carried away the stones of Ramah and its timber with which Baasha had built [the fortifications]. And King Asa built with them [border fortresses at] Geba of Benjamin and Mizpah.

Jehoshaphat Succeeds Asa 23Now as for the rest of all the acts of Asa, all his might, everything that he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? But during the time of his old age he had a foot disease. 24Asa slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried with his fathers in the city of his father David. Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his place.

Nadab, then Baasha, Rules over Israel 25Now Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and he reigned over Israel for two years. 26He did evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the way of his father [Jeroboam] and in his sin [of idolatry], with which he made Israel sin. 27Baasha the son of Ahijah of the house (tribe) of Issachar conspired against Nadab, and Baasha struck him down at Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines, while Nadab and all Israel were laying siege to Gibbethon.

28So Baasha killed Nadab in the third year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his place. 29As soon as he was king, Baasha struck down all the household of Jeroboam. He did not leave for Jeroboam anyone alive, but he destroyed them in accordance with the word of the LORD which He had spoken through His servant Ahijah the Shilonite— 30because of the sins committed by Jeroboam and which he made Israel commit, and because he provoked the LORD God of Israel to anger.

31Now as for the rest of Nadab’s acts and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? War with Judah 32There was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.

33In the third year of Asa king of Judah, Baasha the son of Ahijah became king over all Israel in Tirzah [the capital city], and reigned twenty-four years. 34He did evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the way of Jeroboam and in his sin [of idolatry] with which he made Israel sin.

1 Kings 16
Prophecy Against Baasha

1Now the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, saying, 2“Because I exalted you [Baasha] from the dust and made you leader over My people Israel, and you walked in the way of Jeroboam and made My people Israel sin, provoking Me to anger with their sins [of idol worship], 3behold, I am going to sweep away Baasha and his household (family), and I will make your house (royal line) like that of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 4“The dogs will eat anyone belonging to Baasha who dies in the city, and the birds of the sky will eat anyone belonging to him who dies in the field.”

5Now as for the rest of the acts of Baasha, what he did and his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? The Israelite Kings 6Baasha slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried in Tirzah. Elah his son became king in his place. 7Moreover, the word of the LORD came against Baasha and his household through the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani, both for all the evil that Baasha did in the sight of the LORD in provoking Him to anger with the work of his hands (idolatry), in being like the house of Jeroboam, and because he [willingly] destroyed it (the family of Jeroboam).

8In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of Judah, Elah the son of Baasha became king over Israel in Tirzah, and reigned two years. 9His servant Zimri, commander of half his chariots, conspired against Elah. Now Elah was in Tirzah, getting drunk in the house of Arza, who was in charge of the [king’s] household in Tirzah. 10Then Zimri came in and struck and killed Elah in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and became king in his place. 11When he became king, as soon as he sat on his throne, he killed the entire household of Baasha; he did not leave a single male [alive], either of his relatives or his friends.

12Thus Zimri destroyed the entire household of Baasha, in accordance with the word of the LORD which He spoke against Baasha through Jehu the prophet, 13for all the sins of Baasha and the sins of Elah his son, which they committed, and made Israel commit, provoking the LORD God of Israel to anger with their idols. 14Now as for the rest of the acts of Elah and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?

15In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, Zimri reigned [over Israel] for seven days at Tirzah. Now the troops were camped against Gibbethon, [a city] which belonged to the Philistines, 16and the people who were camped heard it said, “Zimri has conspired and has also struck down the king.” So all Israel made Omri, the commander of the army, king over Israel that day in the camp. 17Then Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah. 18When Zimri saw that the city was taken, he went into the fortress of the king’s palace; and while inside, he set fire to the king’s palace and died, 19because of the sins he had committed, doing evil in the sight of the LORD, by walking in the way of Jeroboam, and because of his sin he caused Israel to sin. 20Now as for the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his [treasonous] conspiracy which he committed, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?

21Then the people of Israel were divided in half. Half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king, and the other half followed Omri. 22But the people who followed Omri prevailed over the people who followed Tibni the son of Ginath. So Tibni died and Omri became king. 23In the thirty-first year of Asa king of Judah, Omri became king over Israel and reigned for twelve years. He reigned six years at Tirzah. 24Omri bought the hill Samaria from Shemer for two talents of silver, and he built a city on the hill [and fortified it], and named the city which he built Samaria, after the owner of the hill, Shemer.

25But Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD, and acted more wickedly than all who came before him. 26He walked in all the ways of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and in his sin, which he made Israel commit, provoking the LORD God of Israel, [to anger] with their idols. 27Now as for the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might which he showed, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 28So Omri slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried in Samaria. Ahab his son became king in his place.

29Ahab the son of Omri became king over Israel in the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah, and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria for twenty-two years. 30Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD more than all [the kings] who were before him.

31It came about, as if it had been a trivial thing for Ahab to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he married Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Sidonians, and went and served Baal and worshiped him. 32So he erected an altar for Baal in the house of Baal which he built in Samaria. 33Ahab also made the Asherah. Ahab did more to provoke the LORD God of Israel than all the kings of Israel who were before him. 34In his days, Hiel the Bethelite rebuilt Jericho. He laid its foundations with the loss of Abiram his firstborn, and set up its gates with the loss of his youngest son Segub, in accordance with the word of the LORD, which He spoke through Joshua the son of Nun.

1 Kings 17
Elijah Predicts Drought

1Now Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the settlers of Gilead, said to Ahab, “As the LORD, the God of Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall be neither dew nor rain these years, except by my word.” 2And the word of the LORD came to him, saying, 3“Go from here and turn eastward and hide yourself by the brook Cherith, which is east of the Jordan [River]. 4“You shall drink from the brook, and I have commanded the ravens to sustain you there [with food].” 5So he went and did in accordance with the word of the LORD; he went and lived by the brook Cherith, which is east of the Jordan. 6And the ravens brought him bread and meat in the morning, and bread and meat in the evening; and he would drink from the brook. 7It happened after a while that the brook dried up, because there was no rain in the land.

8Then the word of the LORD came to him, saying, 9“Arise, go to Zarephath, which belongs to Sidon, and stay there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to provide for you.” 10So he set out and went to Zarephath, and when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there gathering sticks [for firewood]. He called out to her and said, “Please bring me a little water in a jar, so that I may drink.” 11As she was going to get it, he called to her and said, “Please bring me a piece of bread in your hand.” 12But she said, “As the LORD your God lives, I have no bread, only a handful of flour in the bowl and a little oil in the jar. See, I am gathering a few sticks so that I may go in and bake it for me and my son, that we may eat it [as our last meal] and die.” 13Elijah said to her, “Do not fear; go and do as you have said. Just make me a little bread from it first and bring it out to me, and afterward you may make one for yourself and for your son. 14“For this is what the LORD God of Israel says: ‘The bowl of flour shall not be exhausted nor shall the jar of oil be empty until the day that the LORD sends rain [again] on the face of the earth.’” 15She went and did as Elijah said. And she and he and her household ate for many days. 16The bowl of flour was not exhausted nor did the jar of oil become empty, in accordance with the word of the LORD which He spoke through Elijah.

Elijah Raises the Widow’s Son 17It happened after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, became sick; and his illness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. 18So she said to Elijah, “What [problem] is there between you and me, O man of God? Have you come to me to bring my sin to mind and to put my son to death?” 19He said to her, “Give me your son.” Then he took him from her arms and carried him up to the upper room where he was living, and laid him on his own bed. 20He called to the LORD and said, “O LORD my God, have You brought further tragedy to the widow with whom I am staying, by causing her son to die?” 21Then he stretched himself out upon the child three times, and called to the LORD and said, “O LORD my God, please let this child’s life return to him.” 22The LORD heard the voice of Elijah, and the life of the child returned to him and he revived. 23Elijah took the child and brought him down from the upper room into the [lower part of the] house and gave him to his mother; and Elijah said, “See, your son is alive.” 24Then the woman said to Elijah, “Now I know that you are a man of God and that the word of the LORD in your mouth is truth.”

1 Kings 18
Obadiah Meets Elijah

1Now it happened after many days that the word of the Lord came to Elijah in the third year, saying, “Go, show yourself to Ahab, and I will send rain on the face of the earth.” 2So Elijah went to show himself to Ahab. Now the famine was severe in Samaria. 3Ahab called Obadiah who was the governor of his house. (Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly; 4for when Jezebel destroyed the prophets of the LORD, Obadiah took a hundred prophets and hid them by fifties in a cave, and provided them with bread and water.) 5Then Ahab said to Obadiah, “Go into the land to all the sources of water and to all the streams; perhaps we may find grass and keep the horses and mules alive, and not have to kill some of the cattle.” 6So they divided the land between them to survey it. Ahab went one way by himself and Obadiah went another way by himself.

7As Obadiah was on the way, behold, Elijah met him. He recognized him and fell face downward [out of respect] and said, “Is it you, my lord Elijah?” 8He answered him, “It is I. Go tell your master, ‘Elijah is here.’” 9But he said, “What sin have I committed, that you would hand over your servant to Ahab to put me to death? 10As the LORD your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my master has not sent messengers to seek you; and when they said, ‘He is not here,’ Ahab made the kingdom or nation swear that they had not found you. 11“And now you are saying, ‘Go, tell your master, “Behold, Elijah [is here].”’ 12And as soon as I leave you, the Spirit of the LORD will carry you to a place I do not know; so when I come to tell Ahab and he does not find you, he will kill me. Yet your servant has [reverently] feared the LORD from my youth. 13Has it not been told to my lord [Elijah] what I did when Jezebel killed the prophets of the LORD, how I hid a hundred of the LORD’S prophets by fifties in a cave, and provided them with bread and water? 14“And now you are saying, ‘Go, tell your master, “Elijah is here”’; and he will kill me.” 15Elijah said, “As the LORD of hosts (armies) lives, before whom I stand, I will certainly show myself to Ahab today.” 16So Obadiah went to meet Ahab and told him; and Ahab went to meet Elijah.

17When Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab said to him, “Are you the one who is bringing disaster on Israel?” 18Elijah said, “I have not brought disaster on Israel, but you and your father’s household have, by abandoning (rejecting) the commandments of the LORD and by following the Baals. 19“Now then, send word and gather to me all Israel at Mount Carmel, together with the 450 prophets of Baal and the 400 prophets of [the goddess] Asherah, who eat at [Queen] Jezebel’s table.”

God or Baal on Mount Carmel 20So Ahab sent word to all the Israelites and assembled the [pagan] prophets together at Mount Carmel. 21Elijah approached all the people and said, “How long will you hesitate between two opinions? If the LORD is God, follow Him; but if Baal, follow him.” But the people [of Israel] did not answer him [so much as] a word. 22Then Elijah said to the people, “I alone remain a prophet of the LORD, while Baal’s prophets are 450 men. 23Now let them give us two oxen, and let them choose one ox for themselves and cut it in pieces, and lay it on the wood, but put no fire under it. I will prepare the other ox and lay it on the wood, and I will not put a fire under it. 24“Then you call on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of the LORD; and the god who answers by fire, He is God.” And all the people answered, “It is well spoken.”

25Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, “Choose one bull for yourselves and prepare it first, since there are many of you; and call on the name of your god, but put no fire under it.” 26So they took the bull that was given to them and prepared it, and called on the name of Baal from morning until noon, saying, “O Baal, hear and answer us.” But there was no voice and no one answered. And they leaped about the altar which they had made. 27At noon Elijah mocked them, saying, “Cry out with a loud voice, for he is a god; either he is occupied, or he is out [at the moment], or he is on a journey. Perhaps he is asleep and must be awakened!” 28So they cried out with a loud voice [to get Baal’s attention] and cut themselves with swords and lances in accordance with their custom, until the blood flowed out on them. 29As midday passed, they played the part of prophets and raved dramatically until the time for offering the evening sacrifice; but there was no voice, no one answered, and no one paid attention.

30Then Elijah said to all the people, “Come near to me.” So all the people approached him. And he repaired and rebuilt the [old] altar of the LORD that had been torn down [by Jezebel]. 31Then Elijah took twelve stones in accordance with the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of the LORD had come, saying, “Israel shall be your name.” 32So with the stones Elijah built an altar in the name of the LORD. He made a trench around the altar large enough to hold two measures of seed. 33Then he laid out the wood and cut the ox in pieces and laid it on the wood. 34And he said, “Fill four pitchers with water and pour it on the burnt offering and the wood.” And he said, “Do it the second time.” And they did it the second time. And he said, “Do it the third time.” And they did it a third time. 35The water flowed around the altar, and he also filled the trench with water. Elijah’s Prayer 36At the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, Elijah the prophet approached [the altar] and said, “O LORD, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel (Jacob), let it be known today that You are God in Israel and that I am Your servant and that I have done all these things at Your word. 37“Answer me, O LORD, answer me, so that this people may know that You, O LORD, are God, and that You have turned their hearts back [to You].” 38Then the fire of the LORD fell and consumed the burnt offering and the wood, and even the stones and the dust; it also licked up the water in the trench. 39When all the people saw it, they fell face downward; and they said, “The LORD, He is God! The LORD, He is God!” 40Then Elijah said to them, “Seize the prophets of Baal; do not let one of them escape.” They seized them; and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and [as God’s law required] killed them there.

41Now Elijah said to Ahab, “Go up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of the roar of an abundance of rain.” 42So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he crouched down to the earth and put his face between his knees, 43and he said to his servant, “Go up, look toward the sea.” So he went up and looked and said, “There is nothing.” Elijah said, “Go back” seven times. 44And at the seventh time the servant said, “A cloud as small as a man’s hand is coming up from the sea.” And Elijah said, “Go up, say to Ahab, ‘Prepare your chariot and go down, so that the rain shower does not stop you.’” 45In a little while the sky grew dark with clouds and wind, and there were heavy showers. And Ahab mounted and rode [his chariot] and went [inland] to Jezreel. 46Then the hand of the LORD came upon Elijah [giving him supernatural strength]. He girded up his loins and outran Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel [nearly twenty miles].

1 Kings 19
Elijah Flees From Jezebel

1Now Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and how he had killed all the prophets [of Baal] with the sword. 2Then Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, saying, “So may the gods do to me, and even more, if by this time tomorrow I do not make your life like the life of one of them.” 3And Elijah was afraid and arose and ran for his life, and he came to Beersheba which belongs to Judah, and he left his servant there. 4But he himself traveled a day’s journey into the wilderness, and he came and sat down under a juniper tree and asked [God] that he might die. He said, “It is enough; now, O LORD, take my life, for I am no better than my fathers.” 5He lay down and slept under the juniper tree, and behold, an angel touched him and said to him, “Get up and eat.” 6He looked, and by his head there was a bread cake baked on hot coal, and a pitcher of water. So he ate and drank and lay down again. 7Then the angel of the LORD came again a second time and touched him and said, “Get up, and eat, for the journey is too long for you [without adequate sustenance].” 8So he got up and ate and drank, and with the strength of that food he traveled forty days and nights to Horeb (Sinai), the mountain of God.

Elijah at Horeb 9There he came to a cave and spent the night in it; and behold, the word of the LORD came to him, and He said to him, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” 10He said, “I have been very zealous (impassioned) for the LORD God of hosts (armies) [proclaiming what is rightfully and uniquely His]; for the sons of Israel have abandoned (broken) Your covenant, torn down Your altars, and killed Your prophets with the sword. And I, only I, am left; and they seek to take away my life.”

11So He said, “Go out and stand on the mountain before the LORD.” And behold, the LORD was passing by, and a great and powerful wind was tearing out the mountains and breaking the rocks in pieces before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind. And after the wind, [there was] an earthquake, but the LORD was not in the earthquake. 12After the earthquake, [there was] a fire, but the LORD was not in the fire; and after the fire, [there was] the sound of a gentle blowing. 13When Elijah heard the sound, he wrapped his face in his mantle (cloak) and went out and stood in the entrance of the cave. And behold, a voice came to him and said, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” 14He said, “I have been very zealous for the LORD God of hosts (armies), because the sons of Israel have abandoned (broken) Your covenant, torn down Your altars and killed Your prophets with the sword. And I, only I, am left; and they seek to take away my life.”

15The LORD said to him, “Go, return on your way to the Wilderness of Damascus; and when you arrive, you shall anoint Hazael as king over Aram (Syria); 16and you shall anoint Jehu the son of Nimshi as king over Israel; and anoint Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah as prophet in your place. 17It shall come about that Jehu shall put to death whoever escapes from the sword of Hazael, and Elisha shall put to death whoever escapes the sword of Jehu. 18“Yet I will leave 7,000 [survivors] in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed down to Baal and every mouth that has not kissed him.”

19So Elijah departed from there and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, while he was plowing with twelve pairs of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth. Elijah went over to him and threw his mantle (coat) on him. 20He left the oxen and ran after Elijah and said, “Please let me kiss my father and mother [goodbye], then I will follow you.” And he said to him, “Go on back; for what have I done to [stop] you?” 21So Elisha left him and went back. Then he took a pair of oxen and sacrificed them and boiled their meat with the implements of the oxen [as fuel], and gave the meat to the people, and they ate. Then he stood and followed Elijah, and served him.

1 Kings 20
War With Aram

1Ben-hadad king of Aram (Syria) gathered all his army together; thirty-two kings were [allied] with him, with horses and chariots. And he went up and besieged Samaria [Israel’s capital], and fought against it. 2Then he sent messengers to the city to Ahab king of Israel; and he said to him, “Thus says Ben-hadad: 3‘Your silver and your gold are mine; your wives and your children, even the fairest, also are mine [as conditions of peace].’” 4The king of Israel [conceded his defeat and] answered, “By your word, my lord, O king, I am yours, and all that I have.” 5The messengers returned and said, “Thus says Ben-hadad: ‘I indeed sent word to you, saying, “You shall give me your silver, your gold, your wives, and your children,” 6but about this time tomorrow I will send my servants to you, and they will search your house and the houses of your servants; and they will take with their hands (confiscate) whatever is desirable in your eyes and carry it away.’”

7Then the king of Israel summoned all the elders of the land and said, “Please observe and see how this man is seeking our destruction. For he sent messengers to me for my wives, my children, my silver, and my gold, and I did not refuse him.” 8All the elders and all the people said to him, “Do not listen or consent [to this additional demand].” 9So he said to Ben-hadad’s messengers, “Tell my lord the king, ‘Every demand you first sent to your servant I will do, but I cannot do this [additional] thing [as a condition of peace].’” And the messengers left; then they brought him word again. 10Ben-hadad sent word to him and said, “May the gods do so to me, and more also, if there is enough dust left of Samaria for handfuls for all the [armed] people who follow me.” 11The king of Israel answered, “Tell him, ‘A man who puts on [his armor to go to battle] should not boast like the man who takes it off [after the battle has been won].’” 12When Ben-hadad heard this message, as he and the kings were drinking in the temporary shelters, he said to his servants, “Station yourselves.” So they stationed themselves against the city [of Samaria].

Ahab Victorious 13Then a prophet approached Ahab king of Israel and said, “Thus says the LORD: ‘Have you seen all this great army? Behold, I will hand them over to you, and you shall know [without any doubt] that I am the LORD.’” 14Ahab said, “By whom?” And he said, “Thus says the LORD: ‘By the young men [the attendants or bodyguards] of the governors of the districts.’” Then Ahab said, “Who shall begin the battle?” And he answered, “You.” 15Then Ahab assembled and counted the young men of the governors of the districts, and there were 232. After them he assembled and counted all the people, all the sons of Israel, 7,000.

16They went out at noon, while Ben-hadad was getting drunk in the temporary shelters, he and the thirty-two kings who were helping him. 17The young men of the governors of the districts went out first; and Ben-hadad sent men out and they told him, saying, “Men have come out of Samaria.” 18And he said, “Whether they have come out for peace or for war, take them alive.”

19So these young men of the governors of the districts went out of the city, and the army followed them. 20And each one killed his man; and the Arameans (Syrians) fled and Israel pursued them. Ben-hadad king of Aram escaped on a horse with horsemen. 21The king of Israel went out and struck [the riders of] the horses and chariots, and killed the Arameans in a great slaughter.

22Then the prophet approached the king of Israel and said to him, “Go, strengthen yourself and observe and see what you have to do; for at the first of next year the king of Aram (Syria) will come up against you.”

23Now the servants of the king of Aram said to him, “Israel’s god is a god of the hills; that is why they were stronger than we. But let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we will be stronger than they. 24Do this: remove the [thirty-two allied] kings, each from his place, and put captains in their place, 25and assemble an army like the army that you have lost in battle, horse for horse and chariot for chariot. Then we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.” And he listened to their words and did so.

Another Aramean War 26At the first of the year [in spring], Ben-hadad assembled and counted the Arameans (Syrians) and went up to Aphek [east of the Sea of Galilee] to fight against Israel. 27The sons of Israel were counted and given provisions, and they went to meet them. The Israelites camped before the enemy like two little flocks of goats [with everything against them, except God], and the Arameans filled the country. 28A man of God approached and said to the king of Israel, “Thus says the LORD, ‘Because the Arameans have said, “The LORD is a god of the hills, but He is not a god of the valleys,” I will give this great army into your hand, and you shall know [by experience] that I am the LORD.’” 29So they camped opposite each other for seven days. Then on the seventh day the battle began, and the sons of Israel killed 100,000 of the Aramean foot soldiers in a single day. 30But the rest ran to the city of Aphek, and the [city] wall fell on 27,000 of the men who were left. Ben-hadad escaped and came into the city, going into an inner chamber [to hide].

31But his servants said to him, “We have heard that the kings of the house (royal line) of Israel are merciful kings. Please let us put sackcloth around our loins and ropes on our necks [as symbols of submission], and go out to the king of Israel; perhaps he will spare your life.” 32So they put sackcloth around their loins and ropes on their necks, and came to the king of Israel and said, “Your servant Ben-hadad says, ‘Please let me live.’” And Ahab asked, “Is he still alive? He is my brother.” 33Now the men took it as a good omen, and quickly understanding his meaning said, “Yes, your brother Ben-hadad lives.” Then the king said, “Go, bring him.” Then Ben-hadad came out to him, and Ahab had him come up into the chariot. 34Ben-hadad [tempting him] said to him, “I will restore the cities which my father took from your father; and you may set up bazaars (shops) of your own in Damascus, as my father did in Samaria.” Then, Ahab replied, “I will let you go with this covenant (treaty).” So he made a covenant with him and let him go.

35Now a certain man of the sons of the prophets said to another by the word of the LORD, “Please strike me.” But the man refused to strike him. 36Then the prophet said to him, “Because you have not obeyed the voice of the LORD, behold, as soon as you leave me, a lion will kill you.” And as soon as he left him, a lion found him and killed him. 37Then the prophet found another man and said, “Please strike me.” So the man struck him hard, wounding him. 38So the prophet left and waited for King Ahab by the road, and disguised himself [as a wounded soldier] with a bandage over his eyes. 39As the king passed by, the prophet called out to the king and said, “Your servant went out into the middle of the battle, and behold, a man turned aside and brought a man to me and said, ‘Guard this man; if for any reason he is missing, then your life shall be required for his life, or else you shall pay a talent of silver.’ 40“But while your servant was busy here and there, he [escaped and] was gone.” And the king of Israel said to him, “Such is your own judgment (verdict); you have determined it.” 41Then the prophet quickly removed the bandage from his eyes, and [Ahab] the king of Israel recognized him as one of the prophets. 42He said to the king, “Thus says the LORD: ‘Because you have released from your hand the man [Ben-hadad] whom I had devoted to destruction, your life shall be required for his life, and your people for his people.’” 43So the king of Israel went to his house resentful and sullen, and came to Samaria.

1 Kings 21
Ahab Covets Naboth’s Vineyard

1Now it came about after these things that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard in Jezreel, close beside the [winter] palace of Ahab king of Samaria; 2Ahab spoke to Naboth, saying, “Give me your vineyard, so that I may have it for a garden of vegetables and herbs, because it is near my house. I will give you a better vineyard for it, or, if you prefer, I will give you what it is worth in money.” 3But Naboth said to Ahab, “The LORD forbid me that I should give the inheritance of my fathers to you.” 4So Ahab [already upset by the Lord’s message] came into his house [feeling more] resentful and sullen because of what Naboth the Jezreelite had said to him; for he had said, “I will not give you the inheritance of my fathers.” And he lay down on his bed and turned away his face, and would not eat any food.

5Then Jezebel his wife came to him and asked him, “Why is your spirit so troubled that you have not eaten?” 6And he said to her, “Because I spoke to Naboth the Jezreelite and said to him, ‘Give me your vineyard for money; or if you prefer, I will give you another vineyard for it.’ But he answered, ‘I will not give you my vineyard.’” 7Jezebel his wife said to him, “Do you now reign over Israel? Get up, eat food, and let your heart rejoice; I will give you the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.”

8So she wrote letters in Ahab’s name and sealed them with his seal, and sent them to the elders and nobles who lived with Naboth in his city. 9Now in the letters she wrote, “Proclaim a fast and seat Naboth at the head of the people; 10and seat two worthless and unprincipled men opposite him, and have them testify against him, saying, ‘You cursed God and the king.’ Then take him out and stone him to death.”

Jezebel’s Plot 11So the men of his city, the elders and the nobles who lived there, did as Jezebel had sent word to them, just as it was written in the letters which she had sent to them. 12They proclaimed a fast and seated Naboth at the head of the people. 13Two worthless and unprincipled men came in and sat down opposite him; and they testified against Naboth before the people, saying, “Naboth cursed and renounced God and the king.” Then they brought him outside the city and stoned him to death. 14Then they sent word to Jezebel, saying, “Naboth has been stoned to death.”

15When Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned and was dead, she said to Ahab, “Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite which he refused to sell you, because Naboth is no longer alive, but dead.” 16When Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, he arose to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it.

17Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 18“Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who is in Samaria. Behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, where he has gone to take possession of it. 19“You shall speak to him, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD: “Have you murdered and also taken possession [of the victim’s property]?”’ And you shall speak to him, saying, ‘Thus says the Lord: “In the place where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth, dogs will lick up your blood as well.”’”

20Ahab said to Elijah, “Have you found me, O my enemy?” And he answered, “I have found you, because you have sold yourself to do evil in the sight of the LORD. 21Behold [says the LORD], I am bringing evil (catastrophe) on you, and will utterly sweep you away, and will cut off from Ahab every male, both bond and free in Israel; 22and I will make your house (descendants) like that of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for provoking Me to anger and making Israel sin. 23The LORD also spoke in regard to Jezebel, saying, ‘The dogs will eat [the body of] Jezebel in the district of Jezreel.’ 24“The dogs will eat anyone belonging to Ahab who dies in the city, and the birds of the air will eat anyone who dies in the field.”

25There certainly was no one like Ahab who sold himself to do evil in the sight of the LORD, because Jezebel his wife incited him. 26He acted very repulsively in following idols, in accordance with everything the Amorites had done, whom the LORD expelled [from the land] before the sons of Israel.

27Now when Ahab heard these words [of Elijah], he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth and fasted, and he lay in sackcloth and went about dejectedly (mourning). 28Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 29“Do you see how Ahab has humbled himself before Me? Because he has humbled himself before Me, I will not bring the evil (catastrophe) in his lifetime, but in his son’s days I will bring evil upon his house.”

1 Kings 22
Ahab’s Third Campaign Against Aram

1Aram (Syria) and Israel continued without war for three years. 2In the third year Jehoshaphat king of Judah came down to the king of Israel. 3Now the king of Israel said to his servants, “Do you know that Ramoth in Gilead is ours, yet we are still doing nothing to take it from the hand of the king of Aram?” 4And Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, “Will you go with me to battle at Ramoth-gilead?” Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, “I am as you are, my people as your people, my horses as your horses.”

5But Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, “Please inquire first for the word of the LORD.” 6Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said to them, “Shall I go to battle against Ramoth-gilead, or should I not?” And they said, “Go up, for the LORD has handed it over to the king.” 7But Jehoshaphat [doubted and] said, “Is there not another prophet of the LORD here whom we may ask?” 8The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “There is one more man, Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may inquire of the LORD, but I hate him, because he never prophesies good news for me, but only evil.” But Jehoshaphat said, “May the king not say that [Micaiah only tells bad news].” 9Then the king of Israel summoned an officer and said, “Bring quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.” 10Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah were each sitting on his throne, dressed in their [royal] robes, [in an open place] at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets were prophesying before them. 11Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made for himself horns of iron and said, “Thus says the LORD: ‘With these you will gore the Arameans (Syrians) until they are destroyed.’” 12All the prophets were prophesying in the same way [to please Ahab], saying, “Go up to Ramoth-gilead and be successful, for the LORD will hand it over to the king.”

Micaiah Predicts Defeat 13Then the messenger who went to summon Micaiah said to him, “Listen carefully, the words of the prophets are unanimously favorable to the king. Please let your words be like the word of one of them, and speak favorably.” 14But Micaiah said, “As the LORD lives, I will speak what the LORD says to me.”

15So when he came to the king, the king said to him, “Micaiah, shall we go against Ramoth-gilead in battle, or shall we not?” And he answered him, “Go up and be successful, for the LORD will hand it over to the king.” 16But the king [doubted him and] said to him, “How many times must I make you swear to tell me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?” 17And he said,
“I saw all Israel
Scattered upon the mountains,
Like sheep that have no shepherd.
And the LORD said,
‘These have no master.
Let each of them return to his house in peace.’”

18Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not tell you that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?”

19Micaiah said, “Therefore, hear the word of the LORD. I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host (army) of heaven standing by Him on His right hand and on His left. 20The LORD said, ‘Who will entice Ahab to go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?’ And one said this, while another said that. 21Then a spirit came forward and stood before the LORD and said, ‘I will entice him.’ 22The LORD said to him, ‘How?’ And he said, ‘I will go out and be a deceiving spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ Then the LORD said, ‘You are to entice him and also succeed. Go and do so.’ 23“Now then, behold, the LORD has put a deceiving spirit in the mouth of all these prophets; and the LORD has proclaimed disaster against you.”

24But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah approached and struck Micaiah on the cheek and said, “How did the Spirit of the LORD pass from me to speak to you?” 25Micaiah said, “Behold, you shall see on that day [of the king’s defeat] when you enter an inner room [looking for a place] to hide yourself.” 26Then the king of Israel said, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon, the governor of the city, and to Joash, the king’s son, 27and say, ‘Thus says the king, “Put this man in prison, and feed him sparingly with the bread and water until I return safely.”’” 28Micaiah said, “If you indeed return safely, the LORD has not spoken by me.” Then he said, “Listen, all you people.”

Defeat and Death of Ahab 29So [Ahab] the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead. 30The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and enter the battle, but you put on your [royal] clothing.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and went into the battle. 31Now the king of Aram (Syria) had commanded the thirty-two captains of his chariots, saying, “Do not fight with [anyone, either] small or great, but with [Ahab] the king of Israel alone.” 32When the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “Surely it is the king of Israel.” They turned to fight against him, and Jehoshaphat shouted out [in fear]. 33When the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him.

34But one man drew a bow at random and struck the king of Israel in a joint of the armor. So he said to the driver of his chariot, “Turn around and take me out of the fight, because I have been seriously wounded.” 35The battle raged that day, and [Ahab] the king was propped up in his chariot facing the Arameans (Syrians). And in the evening he died, and the blood from his wound ran down into the bottom of the chariot. 36Then about sundown a resounding cry passed throughout the army, saying, “Every man to his city and every man to his own country!”

37So the king died and was brought to Samaria, and they buried the king in Samaria. 38They washed the chariot by the pool [on the outskirts] of Samaria, where the prostitutes bathed, and the dogs licked up his blood, in accordance with the word of the LORD which He had spoken. 39Now the rest of Ahab’s acts, and everything that he did, the ivory palace which he built and all the cities which he built, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 40So Ahab slept with his fathers [in death], and Ahaziah his son became king in his place.

The New Rulers 41Now Jehoshaphat the son of Asa became king over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel. 42Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 43He walked in all the ways of Asa his father, without turning from them, doing right in the sight of the LORD. However, the high places were not removed; the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. 44Jehoshaphat also made peace with the king of Israel.

45Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, his might which he displayed and how he made war, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 46And the remnant of the sodomites (male cult prostitutes) who remained in the days of his father Asa, Jehoshaphat expelled from the land.

47Now there was no king in Edom; a deputy (governor) was [serving as] king. 48Jehoshaphat had [large cargo] ships of Tarshish constructed to go to Ophir for gold, but they did not go, because the ships were wrecked at Ezion-geber. 49Then Ahaziah the son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, “Let my servants go with your servants in the ships,” But Jehoshaphat was unwilling and refused. 50Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried with his fathers in the city of his father David, and Jehoram his son became king in his place.

51Ahaziah the son of Ahab became king over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and he reigned over Israel for two years. 52He did evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the [idolatrous] way of his father [Ahab] and of his mother [Jezebel], and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin. 53He served Baal and worshiped him, and he provoked the LORD God of Israel to anger, in accordance with everything that his father [Ahab] had done.

2 Kings 1
Ahaziah’s Messengers Meet Elijah

1Now Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab. 2Ahaziah [the king of Israel] fell through the lattice (grid) in his upper chamber which was in Samaria, and became sick [from the injury]. So he sent messengers, saying to them, “Go, inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, if I will recover from this sickness.” 3But the angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite, “Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say to them, ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are going to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?’ 4“Therefore this is what the LORD says: ‘You [Ahaziah] will not leave the bed on which you lie, but you will certainly die.’” So Elijah departed.

5When the messengers returned to Ahaziah, he said to them, “Why have you returned [so soon]?” 6They replied, “A man came up to meet us and said to us, ‘Go, return to the king who sent you and tell him, “Thus says the LORD: ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you send to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore you will not leave the bed on which you lie, but you will certainly die.’”’” 7The king asked them, “What was the appearance of the man who came up to meet you and said these things to you?” 8They answered him, “He was a hairy man with a [wide] leather band bound around his loins.” And Ahaziah said, “It is Elijah the Tishbite.”

9Then the king sent to Elijah a captain of fifty with his fifty [fighting men to seize the prophet]. And he went up to him, and behold, he was sitting on the top of a hill. And the captain said to him, “Man of God, the king says, ‘Come down.’” 10Elijah replied to the captain of fifty, “So if I am a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty [fighting men].” Then fire fell from heaven and consumed him and his fifty.

11So King Ahaziah again sent to him another captain of fifty with his fifty [fighting men]. And he said to him, “Man of God, thus says the king, ‘Come down quickly.’” 12Elijah answered them, “If I am a man of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty [fighting men].” And the fire of God came down from heaven and consumed him and his fifty.

13So Ahaziah again sent a captain of a third fifty with his fifty [fighting men]. And the third captain of fifty went up and came bowed down on his knees before Elijah, and begged him [for compassion] and said to him, “O man of God, please let my life and the lives of your servants, these fifty, be precious in your sight. 14“Behold, fire came down from heaven and consumed the first two captains of fifty with their fifties; but now let my life be precious in your sight.” 15The angel of the LORD said to Elijah, “Go down with him; do not be afraid of him.” So he stood and went down with him to the king. 16Then Elijah said to Ahaziah, “Thus says the LORD: ‘Since you have sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub, god of Ekron—is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of His word?—therefore you will not leave the bed on which you lie, but will certainly die.’”

Jehoram Reigns over Israel 17So Ahaziah [the son of King Ahab] died in accordance with the word of the LORD which Elijah had spoken. And because he had no son, Jehoram [his younger brother] became king [of Israel, the northern kingdom] in his place in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah [the southern kingdom]. 18Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?

2 Kings 2
Elijah Taken To Heaven

1When the LORD was about to take Elijah up to heaven by a whirlwind, Elijah and Elisha were traveling from Gilgal. 2And Elijah said to Elisha, “Please stay here, for the LORD has sent me to Bethel.” But Elisha replied, “As the LORD lives and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethel. 3Now the sons of the prophets who were at Bethel came out to Elisha and said to him, “Do you know that the LORD will take your master away from you today?” He said, “Yes, I know it; be quiet [about it].”

4Elijah said to him, “Elisha, please stay here, for the LORD has sent me to Jericho.” But he said, “As the LORD lives and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” So they came to Jericho. 5The sons of the prophets who were at Jericho approached Elisha and said to him, “Do you know that the LORD will take your master away from you today?” And he answered, “Yes, I know it; be quiet [about it].” 6Elijah said to him, “Please stay here, for the LORD has sent me to the Jordan.” But he said, “As the LORD lives and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” So the two of them went on.

7Fifty men of the sons of the prophets also went and stood opposite them [to watch] at a distance; and the two of them stood by the Jordan. 8And Elijah took his mantle (coat) and rolled it up and struck the waters, and they were divided this way and that, so that the two of them crossed over on dry ground.

9And when they had crossed over, Elijah said to Elisha, “Ask what I shall do for you before I am taken from you.” And Elisha said, “Please let a double portion of your spirit be upon me.” 10He said, “You have asked for a difficult thing. However, if you see me when I am taken from you, it shall be so for you; but if not, it shall not be so.” 11As they continued along and talked, behold, a chariot of fire with horses of fire [appeared suddenly and] separated the two of them, and Elijah went up to heaven in a whirlwind. 12Elisha saw it and cried out, “My father, my father, the chariot of Israel and its horsemen!” And he no longer saw Elijah. Then he took hold of his own clothes and tore them into two pieces [in grief]. 13He picked up the mantle of Elijah that fell off him, and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan. 14He took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him and struck the waters and said, “Where is the LORD, the God of Elijah?” And when he too had struck the waters, they divided this way and that, and Elisha crossed over.

Elisha Succeeds Elijah 15When the sons of the prophets who were [watching] opposite at Jericho saw him, they said, “The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha.” And they came to meet him and bowed down to the ground before him [in respect]. 16Then they said to Elisha, “Behold now, there are among your servants fifty strong men; please let them go and search for your master. It may be that the Spirit of the LORD has taken him up and cast him on some mountain or into some valley.” And he said, “You shall not send anyone.” 17But when they urged him until he was embarrassed [to refuse them], he said, “Send them.” So they sent fifty men, and they searched for three days but did not find Elijah. 18They returned to Elisha while he was staying at Jericho; and he said to them, “Did I not tell you, ‘Do not go’?”

19Then the men of the city said to Elisha, “Look, this city is in a pleasant place, as my lord [Elisha] sees; but the water is bad and the land is barren.” 20He said, “Bring me a new jar, and put salt in it.” So they brought it to him. 21Then Elisha went to the spring of water and threw the salt in it and said, “Thus says the LORD: ‘I [not the salt] have purified and healed these waters; there shall no longer be death or barrenness because of it.’” 22So the waters have been purified to this day, in accordance with the word spoken by Elisha.

23Then Elisha went up from Jericho to Bethel. On the way, young boys came out of the city and mocked him and said to him, “Go up, you baldhead! Go up, you baldhead!” 24When he turned around and looked at them, he cursed them in the name of the LORD. Then two female bears came out of the woods and tore to pieces forty-two of the boys. 25Elisha went from there to Mount Carmel, and from there he returned to Samaria.

2 Kings 3
Jehoram Meets Moab Rebellion

1Jehoram the son of Ahab became king over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years. 2He did evil in the sight of the LORD, but not like his father and mother; for he put away the sacred pillar of Baal that his father had made. 3Nevertheless, he continued in the [idolatrous] sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin; he did not depart from them.

4Mesha the king of Moab was a sheep breeder, and he used to pay [an annual tribute] to the king of Israel 100,000 lambs and the wool of 100,000 rams. 5But when Ahab died, the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel. 6So King Jehoram left Samaria at that time and assembled all [the fighting men of] Israel. 7Then he went and sent word to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, saying, “The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will you go with me to fight against Moab?” And he replied, “I will go; I am as you are, my people as your people, my horses as your horses.” 8Jehoram said, “Which way shall we go up?” Jehoshaphat answered, “The way through the Wilderness of Edom.”

9So the king of Israel went with the king of Judah and the king of Edom. They made a circuit of seven days’ journey, but there was no water for the army or for the cattle that followed them. 10Then the king of Israel said, “We are doomed, for the LORD has called these three kings to be handed over to Moab.” 11But Jehoshaphat said, “Is there no prophet of the LORD here from whom we may inquire of the LORD?” One of the servants of the king of Israel answered, “Elisha the son of Shaphat is here, who used to pour water over Elijah’s hands.” 12Jehoshaphat said, “The word of the LORD is with him.” So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to Elisha.

13Now Elisha said to the king of Israel, “What business do you have with me? Go to the prophets of your [wicked] father [Ahab] and to the prophets of your [pagan] mother [Jezebel].” But the king of Israel said to him, “No, for the LORD has called these three kings together to be handed over to Moab.” 14Elisha said, “As the LORD of hosts (armies) lives, before whom I stand, were it not that I have regard for Jehoshaphat king of Judah, I would not look at you nor see you [king of Israel]. 15“But now bring me a musician.” And it came about while the musician played, that the hand (power) of the LORD came upon Elisha. 16He said, “Thus says the LORD, ‘Make this valley (the Arabah) full of trenches.’ 17For thus says the LORD, ‘You will not see wind or rain, yet that valley will be filled with water, so you and your cattle and your other animals may drink. 18‘This is but a simple thing in the sight of the LORD; He will also hand over the Moabites to you. 19‘You shall strike every fortified city and every choice (principal) city, and cut down every good tree and stop up all sources of water, and ruin every good piece of land with stones.’” 20It happened in the morning, when the sacrifice was offered, that suddenly water came [miraculously] from the area of Edom, and the country was filled with water.

21Now all the Moabites heard that the [three] kings had come up to fight against them, and all who were able to put on armor, as well as those who were older, were summoned and stood [together in battle formation] at the border. 22When they got up early the next morning, the sun shone on the water, and the Moabites saw the water across from them as red as blood. 23And they said, “This is blood! Clearly the kings have fought together, and have killed one another. Now then, Moab, to the spoil [and the plunder of the dead soldiers]!” 24But when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and struck the Moabites, so that they fled before them; and they went forward into the land, killing the Moabites [as they went]. 25They destroyed the [walls of the] cities, and each man threw a stone on every piece of good land, covering it [with stones]. And they stopped up all the springs of water and cut down all the good trees, until they left nothing in Kir-hareseth [Moab’s capital city] but its stones. Then the [stone] slingers surrounded the city and destroyed it. 26When the king of Moab saw that the battle was too fierce for him, he took with him seven hundred swordsmen to break through to the king of Edom; but they could not. 27Then the king of Moab took his eldest son, who was to reign in his place, and offered him [publicly] as a burnt offering [to Chemosh] on the [city] wall [horrifying everyone]. And there was great wrath against Israel, and Israel’s allies [Judah and Edom] withdrew from King Jehoram and returned to their own land.

2 Kings 4
The Widow’s Oil

1Now one of the wives of a man of the sons of the prophets cried out to Elisha [for help], saying “Your servant my husband is dead, and you know that your servant [reverently] feared the LORD; but the creditor is coming to take my two sons to be his slaves [in payment for a loan].” 2Elisha said to her, “What shall I do for you? Tell me, what do you have [of value] in the house?” She said, “Your maidservant has nothing in the house except a [small] jar of [olive] oil.” 3Then he said, “Go, borrow containers from all your neighbors, empty containers—and not just a few. 4“Then you shall go in and shut the door behind you and your sons, and pour out [the oil you have] into all these containers, and you shall set aside each one when it is full.” 5So she left him and shut the door behind her and her sons; they were bringing her the containers as she poured [the oil]. 6When the containers were all full, she said to her son, “Bring me another container.” And he said to her, “There is not a one left.” Then the oil stopped [multiplying]. 7Then she came and told the man of God. He said, “Go, sell the oil and pay your debt, and you and your sons can live on the rest.”

The Shunammite Woman 8Now there came a day when Elisha went over to Shunem, where there was a prominent and influential woman, and she persuaded him to eat a meal. Afterward, whenever he passed by, he stopped there for a meal. 9She said to her husband, “Behold, I sense that this is a holy man of God who frequently passes our way. 10“Please, let us make a small, fully-walled upper room [on the housetop] and put a bed there for him, with a table, a chair, and a lampstand. Then whenever he comes to visit us, he can turn in there.”

11One day he came there and turned in to the upper room and lay down to rest. 12And he said to Gehazi his servant, “Call this Shunammite.” So he called her and she stood before him. 13Now he said to Gehazi, “Say to her now, ‘You have gone to all this trouble for us; what can I do for you? Would you like to be mentioned to the king or to the captain of the army?’” She answered, “I live among my own people [in peace and security and need no special favors].” 14Later Elisha said, “What then is to be done for her?” Gehazi answered, “Well, she has no son and her husband is old.” 15He said, “Call her.” So Gehazi called her, and she [came and] stood in the doorway. 16Elisha said, “At this season next year, you will embrace a son.” She said, “No, my lord. O man of God, do not lie to your maidservant.”

17But the woman conceived and gave birth to a son at that season the next year, just as Elisha had said to her.

The Shunammite’s Son 18When the child was grown, the day came that he went out to his father, to the reapers. 19But he said to his father, “My head, my head.” The man said to his servant, “Carry him to his mother.” 20When he had carried and brought him to his mother, he sat on her lap until noon, and then he died. 21She went up and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and shut the door [of the small upper room] behind him and left. 22Then she called to her husband and said, “Please send me one of the servants and one of the donkeys, so that I may run to the man of God and return.” 23He said, “Why are you going to him today? It is neither the New Moon nor the Sabbath.” And she said, “It will be all right.” 24Then she saddled the donkey and said to her servant, “Drive [the animal] fast; do not slow down the pace for me unless I tell you.” 25So she set out and came to the man of God at Mount Carmel.

When the man of God saw her at a distance, he said to Gehazi his servant, “Look, there is the Shunammite woman. 26“Please run now to meet her and ask her, ‘Is it well with you? Is it well with your husband? Is it well with the child?’” And she answered, “It is well.” 27When she came to the mountain to the man of God, she took hold of his feet. Gehazi approached to push her away; but the man of God said, “Let her alone, for her soul is desperate and troubled within her; and the LORD has hidden the reason from me and has not told me.” 28Then she said, “Did I ask for a son from my lord? Did I not say, ‘Do not give me false hope’?”

29Then he said to Gehazi, “Gird up your loins (prepare now!) and take my staff in your hand, and go [to the woman’s house]; if you meet any man [along the way], do not greet him and if a man greets you, do not [stop to] answer him; and lay my staff on the face of the boy [as soon as you reach the house].” 30The mother of the child said, “As the LORD lives and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” So Elisha arose and followed her. 31Gehazi went on ahead of them and laid the staff on the boy’s face, but there was no sound or response [from the boy]. So he turned back to meet Elisha and told him, “The boy has not awakened (revived).”

32When Elisha came into the house, the child was dead and lying on his bed. 33So he went in, shut the door behind the two of them, and prayed to the LORD. 34Then he went up and lay on the child and put his mouth on his mouth, his eyes on his eyes, and his hands on his hands. And as he stretched himself out on him and held him, the boy’s skin became warm. 35Then he returned and walked in the house once back and forth, and went up [again] and stretched himself out on him; and the boy sneezed seven times and he opened his eyes. 36Then Elisha called Gehazi and said, “Call this Shunammite.” So he called her. And when she came to him, he said, “Pick up your son.” 37She came and fell at his feet, bowing herself to the ground [in respect and gratitude]. Then she picked up her son and left.

The Poisonous Stew 38Elisha came back to Gilgal during a famine in the land. The sons of the prophets were sitting before him, and he said to his servant, “Put on the large pot and cook stew for the sons of the prophets.” 39Then one [of them] went into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine and gathered from it a lapful of wild gourds, and came and cut them up into the pot of stew, although they did not know what they were. 40So they served it for the men to eat. But as they ate the stew, they cried out, “O man of God, there is death in the pot.” And they could not eat it. 41But he said, “Bring flour.” And he threw it into the pot and said, “Serve it for the people so that they may eat.” Then there was nothing harmful in the pot.

42Now [at another time] a man from Baal-shalisha came and brought the man of God bread of the first fruits, twenty loaves of barley bread, and fresh ears of grain [in the husk] in his sack. And Elisha said, “Give it to the people [affected by the famine] so that they may eat.” 43His servant said, “How am I to set [only] this before a hundred [hungry] men?” He said, “Give it to the people so that they may eat, for thus says the LORD, ‘They shall eat and have some left.’” 44So he set it before them, and they ate and left some, in accordance with the word of the LORD.

2 Kings 5
Naaman Is Healed

1Now Naaman, commander of the army of the king of Aram (Syria), was considered a great man by his king, and was highly respected because through Naaman the LORD had given victory to Aram (Syria). He was also a man of courage, but he was a leper. 2The Arameans (Syrians) had gone out in bands [as raiders] and had taken captive a little girl from the land of Israel; and she waited on Naaman’s wife [as a servant]. 3She said to her mistress, “I wish that my master [Naaman] were with the prophet who is in Samaria! Then he would heal him of his leprosy.” 4Naaman went in and told his master [the king], “The girl who is from the land of Israel said such and such.” 5Then the king of Aram (Syria) said, “Go now, and I will send a letter to the king of Israel (Jehoram the son of Ahab).” So he left and took with him ten talents of silver and 6,000 shekels of gold, and ten changes of clothing.

6And he brought the letter to the king of Israel. It said, “And now when this letter comes to you, I will have sent my servant Naaman to you, so that you may heal him of his leprosy.” 7When the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his clothes [in shock and outrage at the request] and said, “Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man sends to me [a request] to heal a man of his leprosy? Just consider [what he is asking] and see how he is seeking an opportunity [for a battle] with me.”

8Now when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes, he sent word to the king, asking, “Why have you torn your clothes? Just let Naaman come to me, and he shall know that there is a [true] prophet in Israel.” 9So Naaman came with his horses and chariots and stopped at the entrance of Elisha’s house. 10Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, “Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and your flesh will be restored to you and you will be clean.” 11But Naaman was furious and went away and said, “Indeed! I thought ‘He would at least come out to [see] me and stand and call on the name of the LORD his God, and wave his hand over the place [of leprosy] and heal the leper.’ 12“Are not Abana and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus [in Aram], better than all the waters of Israel? Could I not wash in them and be clean?” So he turned and went away in a rage. 13Then his servants approached and said to him, “My father, if the prophet had told you to do some great thing, would you not have done it? How much more then, when he has said to you, ‘Wash, and be clean?’” 14So he went down and plunged himself into the Jordan seven times, just as the man of God had said; and his flesh was restored like that of a little child and he was clean.

Gehazi’s Greed 15Then Naaman returned to the man of God, he and all the people in his group, and stood before him. He said, “Behold, I know that there is no God in all the earth, except in Israel; so now accept a blessing and gift from your servant.” 16But Elisha said, “As the LORD lives, before whom I stand, I will accept nothing.” He urged him to take it, but Elisha refused. 17Naaman said, “If not, then please, let your servant be given a load of earth for a team of mules; for [from this day on] your servant will no longer offer a burnt offering nor a sacrifice to other gods, but only to the LORD, [the God of Israel]. 18“In this matter may the LORD pardon your servant: when my master [the king] goes into the house of [his god] Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my hand and I bow in the house of Rimmon, when I bow down in the house of Rimmon, may the LORD pardon your servant in this matter [of attending the king when he worships].” 19Elisha said to him, “Go in peace.” So Naaman departed and was a good distance away from him,

20when Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, “My master has spared this Naaman the Aramean (Syrian), by not accepting from him what he brought. As the LORD lives, I will run after him and get something from him.” 21So Gehazi pursued Naaman. When Naaman saw someone running after him, he got down from the chariot to meet him and said, “Is all well?” 22And he said, “All is well. My master has sent me to say, ‘Just now two young men of the sons of the prophets have come to me from the hill country of Ephraim. Please give them a talent of silver and two changes of clothes.’” 23Naaman said, “Please take two talents.” And he urged him [to accept], and tied up two talents of silver in two bags with two changes of clothes and gave them to two of his servants; and they carried them in front of Gehazi. 24When he came to the hill, he took them from their hand and put them in the house [for safekeeping]; and he sent the men away, and they left. 25Then he went in and stood before his master. Elisha asked him, “Where have you been, Gehazi?” He said, “Your servant went nowhere.”

26Elisha said to him, “Did my heart not go with you, when the man turned from his chariot to meet you? Is it a [proper] time to accept money and clothing and olive orchards and vineyards and sheep and oxen and male and female servants? 27“Therefore, the leprosy of Naaman shall cling to you and to your descendants forever.” So Gehazi departed from his presence, a leper as white as snow.

2 Kings 6
The Axe Head Recovered

1Now the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, “Look now, the place where we live near you is too small for us. 2“Please let us go to the Jordan [River] and let each man take from there a beam [for the building]; and let us make a place there for ourselves where we may live.” And he answered, “Go.” 3Then one said, “Please be willing to go with your servants.” So he answered, “I shall go.” 4So he went with them; and when they came to the Jordan, they cut down [some of] the trees. 5But it happened that as one was cutting down a beam, the axe head fell into the water; and he cried out and said, “Oh no, my master! It was borrowed!” 6The man of God said, “Where did it fall?” When he showed him the place, Elisha cut off a stick and threw it in there, and made the iron [axe head] float. 7He said, “Pick it up for yourself.” So he reached out with his hand and took it.

The Arameans Plot to Capture Elisha 8Now the king of Aram (Syria) was making war against Israel, and he consulted with his servants, saying, “My camp shall be in such and such a place.” 9The man of God sent word to the king of Israel saying, “Be careful not to pass by this place, because the Arameans are pulling back to there.” 10Then the king of Israel sent word to the place about which Elisha had warned him; so he guarded himself there repeatedly.

11Now the heart of the king of Aram (Syria) was enraged over this thing. He called his servants and said to them, “Will you not tell me which of us is helping the king of Israel?” 12One of his servants said, “None [of us is helping him], my lord, O king; but Elisha, the prophet who is in Israel, tells the king of Israel the words that you speak in your bedroom.” 13So he said, “Go and see where he is, so that I may send [men] and seize him.” And he was told, “He is in Dothan.” 14So he sent horses and chariots and a powerful army there. They came by night and surrounded the city.

15The servant of the man of God got up early and went out, and behold, there was an army with horses and chariots encircling the city. Elisha’s servant said to him, “Oh no, my master! What are we to do?” 16Elisha answered, “Do not be afraid, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.” 17Then Elisha prayed and said, “LORD, please, open his eyes that he may see.” And the LORD opened the servants eyes and he saw; and behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire surrounding Elisha. 18When the Arameans came down to him, Elisha prayed to the LORD and said, “Please strike this people (nation) with blindness.” And God struck them with blindness, in accordance with Elisha’s request. 19Then Elisha said to the Arameans, “This is not the way, nor is this the city. Follow me and I will lead you to the man whom you are seeking.” And he led them to Samaria.

20When they had come into Samaria, Elisha said, “LORD, open the eyes of these men, so that they may see.” And the LORD opened their eyes and they saw. Behold, they were in the midst of Samaria. 21When the king of Israel (Jehoram) saw them, he said to Elisha, “My father, shall I kill them? Shall I kill them?” 22Elisha answered, “You shall not kill them. Would you kill those you have taken captive with your sword and bow? Serve them bread and water, so that they may eat and drink, and go back to their master [King Ben-hadad].” 23So the king prepared a great feast for them; and when they had eaten and drunk he sent them away, and they went to their master. And the marauding bands of Aram did not come into the land of Israel again.

The Siege of Samaria—Cannibalism 24But it came about after this, that Ben-hadad king of Aram (Syria) gathered his whole army together and went up and besieged Samaria. 25Now there was a great famine in Samaria; and they besieged it until a donkey’s head was sold for eighty shekels of silver, and a fourth of a kab of dove’s dung for five shekels of silver. 26As the king of Israel (Jehoram) was passing by on the [city] wall a woman cried out to him, “Help, my lord, O king!” 27He said, “If the LORD does not help you, from where shall I get you help? From the threshing floor, or from the wine press?” 28And the king said to her, “What is the matter with you?” She answered, “This woman said to me, ‘Give your son so we may eat him today, and we will eat my son tomorrow.’ 29“So we cooked my son and ate him. The next day I said to her, ‘Give your son so that we may eat him’; but she had hidden her son.” 30When the king heard the woman’s words, he tore his clothes—now he was still walking along on the wall—and the people looked [at him], and he had on sackcloth underneath [his royal robe] next to his skin. 31Then he said, “May God do so to me and more also, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat remains on him today!”

32Now Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. And the king sent a man ahead of him [to behead Elisha]; but before the messenger arrived, Elisha told the elders, “Do you see how this son of [Jezebel] a murderer has sent [a man] to remove my head? Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door and hold it securely against him. Is not the sound of his master’s feet [just] behind him?” 33While Elisha was still talking with them, the messenger came down to him [followed by the king] and the king said, “This evil [situation] is from the LORD! Why should I wait for [help from] the LORD any longer?”

2 Kings 7
Elisha Promises Food

1Then Elisha said, “Hear the word of the LORD. Thus says the LORD, ‘Tomorrow about this time a measure of finely-milled flour will sell for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, at the gate of Samaria.’” 2Then the royal officer on whose arm the king leaned answered the man of God and said, “If the LORD should make windows in heaven [for the rain], could this thing take place?” Elisha said, “Behold, you will see it with your own eyes, but [because you doubt] you will not eat of it.”

Four Lepers Relate Arameans’ Flight 3Now four men who were lepers were at the entrance of the [city’s] gate; and they said to one another, “Why should we sit here until we die? 4“If we say, ‘We will enter the city’—then the famine is in the city and we will die there; and if we sit still here, we will also die. So now come, let us go over to the camp of the Arameans (Syrians). If they let us live, we will live; and if they kill us, we will only die.” 5So they got up at twilight to go to the Aramean camp. But when they came to the edge of the camp, there was no one there. 6For the LORD had caused the Aramean army to hear the sound of chariots, and the sound of horses, the sound of a great army. They had said to one another, “The king of Israel has hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come [and fight] against us.” 7So the Arameans set out and fled during the twilight, and left their tents, horses, and donkeys, even left the camp just as it was, and fled for their lives. 8When these lepers came to the edge of the camp, they went into one tent and ate and drank, and carried away from there silver, gold, and clothing, and went and hid them. Then they went back and entered another tent and carried [some valuable things] from there also, and went and hid them.

9Then they said one to another, “We are not doing the right thing. This is a day of good news, yet we are keeping silent. If we wait until the morning light, some punishment [for not reporting this now] will come on us. So now come, let us go and tell the king’s household.” 10So they came and called to the gatekeepers of the city. They told them, “We went to the camp of the Arameans (Syrians), and behold, there was no one there, nor the sound of man there—only the horses and donkeys tied up, and the tents [had been left] just as they were.” 11Then the gatekeepers called out and it was reported to the king’s household inside [the city]. 12Then the king got up in the night and said to his servants, “I will tell you what the Arameans have done to us. They know that we are hungry; so they have left the camp to hide themselves in the open country, thinking, ‘When they come out of the city, we shall take them alive and get into the city.’” 13One of his servants replied, “Please let some men take five of the horses which remain inside the city. Consider this: [if they are caught then at worst] they will be like all the people of Israel who are left in the city; [even if they are killed then] they will be like all the people of Israel who have already died. So let us send [them] and see [what happens].” 14So they took two chariots with horses, and the king sent them after the Aramean army, saying, “Go and see.” The Promise Fulfilled 15They went after them to the Jordan, and all the road was entirely littered with clothing and equipment which the Arameans (Syrians) had thrown away when they hurriedly fled. And the messengers returned and told the king.

16Then the people [of Israel] went out and plundered the camp of the Arameans. So [goods were so plentiful that] a measure of finely-milled flour [was sold] for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in accordance with the word of the LORD [as spoken through Elisha]. 17Now the king had appointed the royal officer on whose arm he leaned to be in charge of the [city] gate; and the [starving] people trampled him at the gate [as they struggled to get through for food], and he died, just as the man of God had foretold when the king came down to him. 18It happened just as [Elisha] the man of God had spoken to the king, saying, “Two measures of barley will be sold for a shekel and a measure of finely-milled flour for a shekel tomorrow about this time at the gate of Samaria.” 19The royal officer had answered the man of God and said, “Now behold, [even] if the LORD should make windows in heaven, could such a thing happen?” And Elisha had answered, “You will see it with your own eyes, but [because of your doubt] you will not eat it.” 20And so it happened to him; for the people trampled him at the gate, and he died.

2 Kings 8
The King Restores The Shunammite’s Land

1Now Elisha had said to the [Shunammite] woman whose son he had restored to life, “Prepare and go, you and your household, and stay temporarily wherever you can; for the LORD has called for a famine, and moreover, it will come on the land [and continue] for seven years.” 2So the woman set out and did everything in accordance with the word of the man of God. She and her household went and stayed temporarily as foreigners in the land of the Philistines for seven years. 3At the end of the seven years the woman returned from the land of the Philistines; and she went to appeal to the king [of Israel] for her house and for her land. 4Now the king was talking with Gehazi, the servant of the man of God, saying, “Tell me all the great things that Elisha has done.” 5And [just] as Gehazi was telling the king how Elisha had restored the dead to life, behold, the woman whose son he had restored to life appealed to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi said, “My lord, O king, this is the woman and this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life.” 6When the king asked the woman, she told him [everything]. So the king appointed for her a certain high official, saying, “Restore everything that was hers, including all the produce of the field since the day that she left the land until now.”

Elisha Predicts Evil from Hazael 7Now Elisha came to Damascus, and Ben-hadad king of Aram (Syria) was sick; and he was told, “The man of God has come here.” 8And the king said to Hazael, “Take a gift with you and go to meet the man of God, and inquire of the LORD by him, saying, ‘Will I recover from this illness?’” 9So Hazael went to meet Elisha and took a gift with him of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels’ loads; and he came and stood before him and said, “Your son Ben-hadad king of Aram has sent me to you, asking, ‘Will I recover from this illness?’” 10And Elisha said to him, “Go, say to him, ‘You will certainly recover,’ but the LORD has shown me that he will certainly die.” 11Elisha stared steadily at Hazael until he was embarrassed, and then the man of God wept. 12Hazael said, “Why are you weeping, my lord?” He answered, “Because I know the evil that you will do to the sons (descendants) of Israel. You will set their strongholds on fire, kill their young men with the sword, smash their children to pieces, and rip up their pregnant women.” 13Then Hazael said, “Surely not! For what is your servant, who is nothing more than a dog, that he would do this monstrous thing?” And Elisha answered, “The LORD has shown me that you will be king over Aram.” 14Then Hazael departed from Elisha and came to his master, who said to him, “What did Elisha say to you?” And he answered, “He told me you would certainly recover.” 15But the next day Hazael took the bedspread and dipped it in water and covered the king’s face, so that he died. And Hazael became king in his place.

Another Jehoram Reigns in Judah 16Now in the fifth year of Joram (Jehoram) the son of Ahab king of Israel, when Jehoshaphat was king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah became king. 17He was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned for eight years in Jerusalem. 18He walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, just as the house of Ahab had done, for [Athaliah] the daughter of Ahab became his wife. He did evil in the sight of the LORD. 19Yet for the sake of His servant David the LORD was not willing to destroy Judah, since He had promised to give him a lamp (enthroned descendant) through his sons always.

20In his days Edom revolted from the rule of Judah, and set up a king over themselves. 21So Jehoram [king of Judah] went over to Zair [in Edom] with all his chariots. He set out by night and struck down the Edomites who had surrounded him and the captains of his chariots; but the people [of his army] fled to their tents. 22So Edom revolted against Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time. 23The rest of the acts of Jehoram and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? Ahaziah Succeeds Jehoram in Judah 24Jehoram slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried with them in the City of David. Ahaziah his son became king in his place.

25In the twelfth year of Joram (Jehoram) the son of Ahab king of Israel, Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah began to reign. 26Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah, the granddaughter of Omri king of Israel. 27He walked in the ways of the house of Ahab and did evil in the sight of the LORD, as did the house of Ahab, for he was a son-in-law of the house of Ahab.

28Ahaziah went with Joram the son of Ahab to battle against Hazael king of Aram (Syria) in Ramoth-gilead; and the Arameans wounded Joram. 29King Joram returned to Jezreel to be healed of the wounds which the Arameans had inflicted on him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.

2 Kings 9
Jehu Reigns Over Israel

1Now Elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets and said to him, “Gird up your loins (prepare for action), take this flask of oil in your hand and go to Ramoth-gilead. 2When you arrive there, look for Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go in and have him arise from among his brothers, and take him into an inner room. 3“Then take the flask of oil and pour it on his head and say, ‘Thus says the LORD: “I have anointed you king over Israel.”’ Then open the door and flee and do not delay.”

4So the young man, the servant of the prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead. 5When he arrived, the captains of the army were sitting [outside]; and he said, “I have a message for you, O captain.” Jehu said, “To which one of us?” And he said, “For you, O captain.” 6So Jehu got up, and they went into the house. And he poured the oil on Jehu’s head and said to him, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘I have anointed you king over the people of the LORD, over Israel. 7‘You shall strike the house of Ahab your master, so that I may avenge the blood of My servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the LORD, [who have died] at the hands of Jezebel. 8‘For the entire house of Ahab shall perish, and I will cut off from Ahab every male, both bond and free, in Israel. 9‘I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah. 10‘And the dogs will eat Jezebel in the territory of Jezreel, and there will be no one to bury her.’” Then he opened the door and fled.

11When Jehu came out to the servants of his master, one said to him, “Is all well? Why did this madman come to you?” And he said to them, “You know [very well] the man and his talk.” 12And they said, “It is a lie; tell us now.” And he said, “Thus and thus he spoke to me, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD: “I have anointed you king over Israel.”’” 13Then they hurried and each man took his garment and placed it [as a cushion] under Jehu on the top of the [outside] stairs, and blew the trumpet, saying, “Jehu is king!”

Jehoram (Joram) Is Assassinated 14So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi, conspired against Joram [to dethrone and kill him]. Now Joram with all Israel was protecting Ramoth-gilead against Hazael king of Aram (Syria), 15but King Joram had returned to Jezreel to heal from the wounds which the Arameans had inflicted on him when he fought with Hazael king of Aram. So Jehu said, “If this is your intent, let no one survive and leave the city (Ramoth-gilead) to go and tell of the plan in Jezreel [the capital].” 16So Jehu rode in a chariot and went to Jezreel, for Joram was lying there. And Ahaziah king of Judah had come down to see Joram.

17Now the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezreel and he saw the crowd with Jehu as he approached, and said, “I see a company.” And Joram said, “Send a horseman to meet them and have him ask, ‘Do you come in peace?’” 18So the horseman went to meet him and said, “Thus says the king: ‘Do you come in peace?’” And Jehu said, “What have you to do with peace? Rein in behind me.” And the watchman reported, “The messenger approached them, but he has not returned.” 19Then Joram sent out a second horseman, who approached them and said, “Thus says the king: ‘Do you come in peace?’” Jehu replied, “What have you to do with peace? Rein in behind me.” 20And the watchman reported, “He approached them, but he has not returned; and the driving [of the chariot] is like that of Jehu the son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously.”

21Then Joram said, “Harness [the chariot].” When they harnessed his chariot horses, Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his chariot, and they went out to meet Jehu and met him on the property of Naboth the Jezreelite. 22When Joram saw Jehu, he said, “Do you come in peace, Jehu?” And he answered, “What peace [can exist] as long as the fornications of your mother Jezebel and her sorceries are so many?” 23So Joram reined [his chariot] around and fled, and he said to Ahaziah, “Treachery and betrayal, Ahaziah!” 24But Jehu drew his bow with his full strength and shot Joram between his shoulders; and the arrow went out through his heart and he sank down in his chariot. 25Then Jehu said to Bidkar his officer, “Pick him up and throw him on the property of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite; for I remember when you and I were riding together after his father Ahab, that the LORD uttered this prophecy against him: 26‘I certainly saw the blood of Naboth and the blood of his sons yesterday,’ says the LORD, ‘and I will repay you on this property,’ says the LORD. Now then, pick him up and throw him into the property [of Naboth], in accordance with the word of the LORD.”

Jehu Assassinates Ahaziah 27When Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden house. Jehu pursued him and said, “Shoot him too, [while he is] in the chariot.” So they shot him at the ascent to Gur, which is by Ibleam. And Ahaziah fled to Megiddo and died there. 28Then his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem and buried him in his grave with his fathers in the City of David.

29In the eleventh year of Joram, the son of Ahab, Ahaziah became king over Judah.

30So when Jehu came to Jezreel, Jezebel heard about it, and she painted her eyes and adorned her head and looked down from the [upper] window. 31As Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, “Is it well, Zimri, your master’s murderer?” 32Then Jehu raised his face toward the window and said, “Who is on my side? Who?” And two or three officials looked down at him. Jezebel Is Killed 33And he said, “Throw her down.” So they threw her down, and some of her blood spattered on the wall and on the horses, and he trampled her underfoot. 34When he came in, he ate and drank, and said, “See now to this cursed woman and bury her, for she is a king’s daughter.” 35They went to bury her, but they found nothing left of her except the skull and the feet and the palms of her hands. 36So they returned and told Jehu. Then he said, “This is the word of the LORD, which He spoke through His servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, ‘In the property of Jezreel the dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezebel. 37‘The corpse of Jezebel will be like dung on the surface of the field in the property of Jezreel, so they cannot say, “This is Jezebel.”’”

2 Kings 10
Judgment Upon Ahab’s House

1Ahab had seventy sons [and grandsons] in Samaria. So Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria, to the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to the guardians of the children of Ahab, saying, 2“Now as soon as this letter comes to you, since your master’s sons (male descendants) are with you, as well as chariots and horses and a fortified city and weapons, 3select the best and most capable of your master’s sons, and set him on his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s [royal] house.” 4But they were extremely afraid and said, “Look, the two kings did not stand before Jehu; so how can we stand?” 5And the one who was in charge of the household, and the one who was overseer of the city, the elders, and the guardians [of the children] sent word to Jehu, saying, “We are your servants and we will do whatever you tell us, but we will not make any man king; do what is good in your eyes.” 6Then Jehu wrote a second letter to them, saying, “If you are with me and will obey me, take the heads of your master’s sons, and come to me at Jezreel tomorrow about this time.” Now the [dead] king’s sons, seventy persons, were with the great men of the city, who were rearing them. 7When the letter came to them, they took the king’s sons and slaughtered them, seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent them to Jehu at Jezreel. 8When a messenger came and told him, “They have brought the heads of the king’s sons,” he said, “Put them in two heaps at the entrance of the city gate until morning.” 9The next morning he went out and stood and said to all the people, “You are just and innocent; behold, I conspired against [Joram] my master and killed him, but who killed all these? 10“Know then [without any doubt] that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the word of the LORD, which the LORD spoke concerning the house of Ahab, for the LORD has done what He said through His servant Elijah.” 11So Jehu killed all who remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men and his familiar friends and his priests, until he left him without a survivor.

12And he set out and went to Samaria. On the way as he was at the place of the sand heaps [meeting place] for the shepherds, 13Jehu met the relatives of Ahaziah king of Judah and said, “Who are you?” They answered, “We are the relatives of Ahaziah; and we came down to greet the royal princes and the sons of the queen mother [Jezebel].” 14Then Jehu said, “Take them alive.” So they took them alive and [later] slaughtered them at the well by the place of the sand heaps, forty-two men; he left none of them [alive].

15When Jehu went on from there, he met Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him. He greeted him and said to him, “Is your heart right, as my heart is with yours?” Jehonadab answered, “It is.” Jehu said “If it is, give me your hand.” He gave him his hand, and Jehu pulled him up into the chariot. 16And he said, “Come with me and see my zeal for the LORD.” So he had Jehonadab in his chariot. 17When Jehu came to Samaria, he killed everyone who remained of Ahab’s family in Samaria, until he had destroyed all of them, in accordance with the word of the LORD which He spoke to Elijah.

Jehu Destroys Baal Worshipers 18Jehu assembled all the people and said [in pretense] to them, “Ahab served Baal a little; Jehu will serve him much [more]. 19“Now, summon unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his worshipers and all his priests. Let no one be missing, for I have a great sacrifice for Baal; whoever is missing shall not live.” But Jehu did it with trickery, in order to destroy the worshipers of Baal. 20Jehu said, “Consecrate a festive assembly (celebration) for Baal.” And they proclaimed it. 21Then Jehu sent throughout Israel, and all the worshipers of Baal came; there was no one left who did not come. They went to the house (temple) of Baal, and the house of Baal was filled from one end to the other. 22He said to the man in charge of the wardrobe, “Bring out garments for all the worshipers of Baal.” And he brought the garments out to them. 23Then Jehu with Jehonadab the son of Rechab went into the house of Baal; and he said to the worshipers of Baal, “Search carefully and see that there are no servants of the LORD here with you, but only the worshipers of Baal.” 24Then they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings.

Now Jehu had stationed eighty men outside for himself and said, “If any of the men whom I have brought into your hands escape, the one who lets him go shall forfeit his own life for that man’s life.”

25Then it came about, as soon as he had finished offering the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guards and to the royal officers, “Go in and kill them; let no one come out.” And they killed them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the royal officers threw their bodies out, and went to the inner room of the house of Baal. 26They brought out the sacred pillars (obelisks) of the house of Baal and burned them. 27They also tore down the sacred pillar of Baal and tore down the house of Baal, and made it into a latrine [forever unclean] to this day.

28Thus Jehu eradicated Baal from Israel. 29However, Jehu did not turn from the [idolatrous] sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin, that is, [led them to worship] the golden calves which were at Bethel and Dan. 30The LORD said to Jehu, “Because you have done well in executing what is right in My eyes, and have done to the house of Ahab in accordance with everything that was in My heart, your sons (descendants) shall sit on Israel’s throne to the fourth generation.” 31But Jehu did not take care to walk in the law of the LORD, the God of Israel, with all his heart; he did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin.

32So in those days the LORD began to cut off portions of Israel; Hazael [of Aram] defeated them throughout the territory of Israel: 33from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites and the Reubenites and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the Arnon River, even Gilead and Bashan. Jehoahaz Succeeds Jehu 34Now the rest of the acts of Jehu and everything that he did and all his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 35Jehu slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him in Samaria. Jehoahaz his son became king in his place. 36The time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.

2 Kings 11
Athaliah Queen Of Judah

1When Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah [king of Judah] saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal offspring. 2But Jehosheba, the daughter of King Joram [of Judah and half] sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah and abducted him from among the king’s sons who were to be killed, and hid him and his nurse in the bedroom. So they hid him from Athaliah, and he was not put to death. 3Joash was hidden with his nurse in the house (temple) of the LORD for six years, while Athaliah reigned over the land.

4Now in the seventh year Jehoiada [the priest, Jehosheba’s husband] sent for the captains of hundreds of the Carites and of the guard and brought them to him to the house of the LORD. Then he made a covenant with them and put them under oath in the house of the LORD, and showed them the king’s [hidden] son. 5He commanded them, saying, “This is the thing that you shall do: a third of you who come in [reporting for duty] on the Sabbath shall keep watch over the king’s house 6(a third shall also be at the [city] gate Sur, and a third at the gate behind the guards); so you shall keep watch over the palace [from three posts] for defense. 7Two units of you, all those who go out [off duty] on the Sabbath, shall also keep watch over the house (temple) of the LORD for [the protection of] the king. 8“You shall surround the [young] king, each man with weapons in his hand; and whoever comes through the ranks shall be put to death. You are to be with the king when he goes out and when he comes in.”

9The captains of hundreds acted in accordance with everything that Jehoiada the priest commanded; and each of them took his men who were to come in (on duty) on the Sabbath, with those who were to go out (off duty) on the Sabbath, and they came to Jehoiada the priest. 10The priest gave to the captains of hundreds the spears and shields that had been King David’s, which were in the house of the LORD. 11And the guards stood, each man with weapons in his hand, from the right side to the left side of the temple area, by the altar [in the courtyard] and by the temple [proper], all around the king. 12Then Jehoiada brought out the king’s son and put the crown on him and gave him the Testimony [a copy of the Mosaic Law]; and they made him king and anointed him, and they clapped their hands and said, “Long live the king!”

13When Athaliah heard the sound of the guards and of the people, she went into the house of the LORD to the people. 14When she looked, behold, there stood the [young] king [on the platform] by the pillar, as was customary [on such occasions], and the captains and the trumpeters were beside the king; and all the people of the land rejoicing and blowing the trumpets. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and cried, “Treason! Treason!” 15Then Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of hundreds appointed over the army and said to them, “Take her out between the ranks, and whoever follows her put to death with the sword.” For the priest had said, “Let her not be put to death in the house (temple) of the LORD.” 16So they seized her, and she went through the horses’ entrance to the king’s house (palace), and she was put to death there.

17Then Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD, the king, and the people, that they would be the LORD’S people—also between the king and the people [to be his subjects]. 18Then all the people of the land went to the house of Baal and tore it down. They utterly smashed his altar and his images to pieces, and they put Mattan the priest of Baal to death in front of the altars. And [Jehoiada] the priest appointed officers over the house of the LORD. 19Then he took the captains of hundreds, the Carites (royal bodyguards), the guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought the [young] king down from the house of the LORD, and came by way of the guards’ gate to the king’s house. And [little] Joash sat on the throne of the kings. 20So all the people of the land rejoiced and the city [of Jerusalem] was quiet. For they had put Athaliah to death with the sword at the king’s house.

21Jehoash (Joash) was seven years old when he became king.

2 Kings 12
Joash (Jehoash) Reigns Over Judah

1In the seventh year of Jehu [king of Israel], Jehoash became king [over Judah], and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah of Beersheba. 2Jehoash did right in the sight of the LORD all his days in which Jehoiada the priest instructed him. 3Only the high places were not removed; the people were still sacrificing and burning incense [to the LORD] on the high places [rather than at the temple].

The Temple to Be Repaired 4Jehoash said to the priests, “All the money for the dedicated things which is brought into the house of the LORD, in current money, both the money of each man’s assessment [for all those bound by vows], and all the money which any man’s heart prompts him to bring into the house (temple) of the LORD, 5let the priests receive such contributions for themselves, each from his acquaintance; and they shall repair any breach in the house of the LORD, wherever a breach is found.”

6But it came about in the twenty-third year of [the reign of] King Jehoash, that the priests still had not repaired the damages of the LORD’S house. 7Then King Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest and the [other] priests and said to them, “Why are you not repairing the damage of the house (temple)? Now then, do not take any more money from your acquaintances, but turn it all over for [the repair of] the damages of the house.” [You are no longer responsible for this work. I will take it into my own hands.] 8So the priests agreed that they would receive no [more] money from the people, nor [be responsible to] repair the damages of the house.

9Then Jehoiada the priest took a chest and bored a hole in its lid and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one enters the house of the LORD; and the priests who guarded the door put in the chest all the money that was brought [by the people] into the house of the LORD. 10And whenever they saw that there was a large amount of money in the chest, the king’s scribe and the high priest came up and tied it in bags and counted the money that was found in the house of the LORD. 11Then they gave the money, which was weighed out into the hands of those who were doing the work, who had the oversight of the house of the LORD; and they paid it out to the carpenters and builders who worked on the house (temple) of the LORD, 12and to the masons and stonecutters, and to buy timber and hewn (cut) stone to repair any breach in the house of the LORD, and for all that was laid out for repairing the house. 13However, there were not made for the house of the LORD basins of silver, snuffers, bowls, trumpets, any gold containers or [other] silver containers, from the money that was brought into the house of the LORD; 14but they gave that to those who did the work, and with it they repaired the house of the LORD. 15Moreover, they did not require an accounting from the men into whose hands they placed the money to be paid to those who did the work, for they acted in good faith. 16Money from the guilt offerings and money from the sin offerings was not brought into the house of the LORD [for repairs]; it was for the priests.

17Then Hazael king of Aram (Syria) went up, fought against Gath [in Philistia], and captured it. And Hazael resolved to go up to Jerusalem. 18So Jehoash the king of Judah took all the sacred things that Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own sacred things and all the gold that was found in the treasuries of the house (temple) of the LORD and of the king’s house, and sent them to Hazael king of Aram; and Hazael departed from Jerusalem.

Joash (Jehoash) Succeeded by Amaziah in Judah 19Now the rest of the acts of Joash and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 20His servants arose and formed a conspiracy [against him] and struck down Joash [in revenge] at the house of Millo, [on the way] that goes down to Silla. 21For Jozacar (Jozachar) the son of Shimeath and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, struck him and he died; and they buried Joash with his fathers in the City of David. Amaziah his son became king in his place.

2 Kings 13
Kings Of Israel: Jehoahaz And Joash (Jehoash)

1In the twenty-third year of Joash the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu became king over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned seventeen years. 2He did evil in the sight of the LORD, and followed the [idolatrous] sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin; he did not turn from them. 3So the anger of the LORD was kindled and burned against Israel, and He handed them over time and again to Hazael the king of Aram (Syria), and of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael. 4But Jehoahaz sought the favor of the LORD, and the LORD listened to him; for He saw the oppression of Israel, how the king of Aram oppressed them. 5Then the LORD gave Israel a savior [to rescue them and give them peace], so that they escaped from under the hand of the Arameans; and the sons (descendants) of Israel lived in their tents as before. 6Yet they did not turn from the [idolatrous] sins of the [royal] house of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin; but walked in them. And the Asherah [set up by Ahab] also remained standing in Samaria [Israel’s capital]. 7For he left to Jehoahaz [king of Israel] an army of no more than fifty horsemen, ten chariots, and 10,000 footmen, for the king of Aram (Ben-hadad) had destroyed them and made them like dust to be trampled. 8Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, everything that he did and his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 9Jehoahaz slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him in Samaria; Joash his son became king in his place.

10In the thirty-seventh year of Joash king of Judah, Jehoash (Joash) the son of Jehoahaz became king over Israel in Samaria, and reigned sixteen years. 11He did evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not turn away from all the [idolatrous] sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin; but he walked in them. 12Now the rest of the acts of Joash, everything that he did, and his might with which he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 13Joash slept with his fathers [in death], and Jeroboam [II] sat on his throne. Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

Death of Elisha 14Now Elisha had become sick with the illness by which he would die. And Joash the king of Israel came down to him and wept over him and said, “O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel and its horsemen!” 15And Elisha said to him, “Take a bow and arrows.” So he took a bow and arrows. 16Then he said to the king of Israel, “Put your hand on the bow.” And he put his hand on it, and Elisha put his hands on the king’s hands. 17And he said, “Open the window to the east,” and he opened it. Then Elisha said, “Shoot!” And he shot. And Elisha said, “The LORD’S arrow of victory, the arrow of victory over Aram (Syria); for you will strike the Arameans in Aphek until you have destroyed them.” 18Then he said, “Take the arrows,” and he took them. And Elisha said to the king of Israel, “Strike the ground,” and he struck it three times and stopped. 19So the man of God was angry with him and said, “You should have struck five or six times; then you would have struck down Aram until you had destroyed it. But now you shall strike Aram only three times.”

20Elisha died, and they buried him. Now marauding bands of Moabites would invade the land in the spring of the year. 21And it happened that as a man was being buried [on an open bier], they saw a marauding band [coming]; and they threw the man into Elisha’s grave. But when the [body of the] man [was being let down and] touched the bones of Elisha he revived and stood up on his feet.

22Hazael the king of Aram oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz. 23But the LORD was gracious to them and had compassion on them and turned toward them for the sake of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and He was unwilling to destroy them, and did not cast them from His presence until now.

24Hazael king of Aram (Syria) died; Ben-hadad his son became king in his place. 25Then Jehoash (Joash) the son of Jehoahaz recovered from Ben-hadad the son of Hazael the cities which he had taken from Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times Joash defeated Ben-hadad and recovered the cities of Israel.

2 Kings 14
Amaziah Reigns Over Judah

1In the second year of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel, Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah became king. 2He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem. 3He did right in the sight of the LORD, though not like David his father (ancestor). He acted in accordance with everything that his father Joash had done. 4However, the high places were not removed; the people were still sacrificing and burning incense on the high places. 5As soon as the kingdom was firmly in Amaziah’s hand, he executed his servants who had killed his father the king. 6But he did not put the sons of the murderers to death, in compliance with what is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, in which the LORD commanded, saying, “The fathers shall not be put to death for the sons, nor shall the sons be put to death for the fathers; but each shall be put to death [only] for his own sin.”

7Amaziah killed 10,000 [men] of Edom in the Valley of Salt, and took Sela (rock) by war, and renamed it Joktheel, to this day.

8Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash (Joash) the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come, let us face each other [in combat].” 9Jehoash the king of Israel sent word to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, “The [little] thorn-bush in Lebanon sent word to the [tall] cedar in Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son as wife.’ But a wild beast that was in Lebanon passed by and trampled the thorn-bush. 10“You have indeed defeated Edom, and your heart has lifted you up [in pride]. Enjoy your glory but stay at home; for why should you plunge into misery so that you, even you, would fall [at my hand], and Judah with you?”

11But Amaziah would not listen. So Jehoash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah faced each other [in combat] at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah. 12Judah was defeated by Israel, and every man fled to his tent. 13Then Jehoash king of Israel captured Amaziah the king of Judah, the son of Jehoash (Joash), the son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh, and came to Jerusalem and broke through the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Ephraim to the Corner Gate, 400 cubits (600 feet). 14He seized all the gold and silver and all the utensils found in the house (temple) of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king’s house, as well as hostages, and returned to Samaria.

Jeroboam II Succeeds Jehoash (Joash) in Israel 15Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might and how he fought with Amaziah the king of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 16Jehoash slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. His son Jeroboam [II] became king in his place.

Azariah (Uzziah) Succeeds Amaziah in Judah 17Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz king of Israel. 18The rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 19Now a conspiracy was formed against him in Jerusalem, and Amaziah fled [south] to Lachish; but they sent [men] after him to Lachish and killed him there. 20Then they carried him on horses and he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the City of David. 21And all the people of Judah took Azariah, who was [only] sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah. 22He built Elath and restored it to Judah after the king [his father Amaziah] slept with his fathers [in death].

23In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah, Jeroboam [II] the son of Joash (Jehoash) king of Israel became king in Samaria, and reigned forty-one years. 24He did evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not turn from all the [idolatrous] sins of Jeroboam [I] the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin. 25Jeroboam restored Israel’s border from the entrance of Hamath to the Sea of the Arabah (Dead Sea), in accordance with the word of the LORD, the God of Israel, which He spoke through His servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet who was from Gath-hepher. 26For the LORD saw the affliction (suffering) of Israel as very bitter; there was no one left, bond or free, nor any helper for Israel. 27But the LORD had not said that He would blot out the name of Israel from under the heavens, so He saved them by the hand of Jeroboam [II] the son of Joash [king of Israel].

Zechariah Reigns over Israel 28The rest of the acts of Jeroboam [II], all that he did, his might, how he fought, and how he recovered Damascus and Hamath for Israel, which had belonged to Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 29Jeroboam [II] slept with his fathers [in death], even with the kings of Israel. Zechariah his son became king in his place.

2 Kings 15
Series Of Kings: Azariah (Uzziah) Over Judah

1In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam [II] king of Israel, Azariah (Uzziah) the son of Amaziah king of Judah became king. 2He was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 3He did right in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with all that his father Amaziah had done. 4Only [the altars on] the high places were not removed; the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places [instead of worshiping God at the temple]. 5And the LORD struck (afflicted) the king, and he was a leper until the day of his death, and lived in a separate house. Jotham the king’s son was in charge of the household, judging the people of the land. 6Now the rest of Azariah’s acts, and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 7Azariah slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him with his fathers in the City of David. His son Jotham became king in his place.

Zechariah over Israel 8In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah king of Judah, Zechariah the son of Jeroboam [II] became king over Israel in Samaria for six months. 9He did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as his fathers had done; he did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam [I] the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin. 10But Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against Zechariah and struck and killed him in the presence of the people and reigned in his place. 11Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah, behold, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel. 12This is [the fulfillment of] the word of the LORD which He spoke to Jehu, saying, “Your sons (descendants) shall sit on the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.” And so it came to pass.

13Shallum the son of Jabesh became king in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah (Azariah) king of Judah, and he reigned one month in Samaria. 14For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah and came to Samaria, and struck and killed Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria and became king in his place. 15The rest of Shallum’s acts, and his conspiracy which he made, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel. 16Then Menahem struck [the town of] Tiphsah and all who were in it and its borders from Tirzah; [he attacked it] because they did not surrender to him; so he struck it and ripped up all the women there who were pregnant.

Menahem over Israel 17In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah king of Judah, Menahem the son of Gadi became king over Israel, and reigned ten years in Samaria. 18He did evil in the sight of the LORD; for all his days he did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin.

19Pul, [Tiglath-pileser III] king of Assyria, came against the land [of Israel], and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver [as a bribe], so that he might help him to strengthen his control of the kingdom. 20Menahem exacted the money from Israel, from all the wealthy, influential men, fifty shekels of silver from each man to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back and did not stay there in the land. 21Now the rest of Menahem’s acts, and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel? 22And Menahem slept with his fathers [in death]; his son Pekahiah became king in his place.

Pekahiah over Israel 23In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem became king over Israel, and reigned two years in Samaria. 24He did evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not turn from the [idolatrous] sins of Jeroboam [I] the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin. 25But Pekah the son of Remaliah, his officer, conspired against Pekahiah and struck him in Samaria, in the citadel of the king’s house, with Argob and Arieh; and with Pekah were fifty Gileadites. So he killed Pekahiah and became king in his place. 26Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, all that he did, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.

Pekah over Israel 27In the fifty-second year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah became king over Israel, and reigned twenty years in Samaria. 28He did evil in the sight of the LORD; he did not turn from the [idolatrous] sins of Jeroboam [I] the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin.

29In the days of Pekah king of Israel, Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came and took Ijon, Abel-beth-maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor, Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of [the tribe of] Naphtali, and he carried the people captive to Assyria. 30Hoshea the son of Elah conspired against Pekah the son of Remaliah [of Israel]; he struck and killed him, and became king in his place in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah [king of Judah]. 31Now the rest of Pekah’s acts, and everything that he did, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of Israel’s Kings.

Jotham over Judah 32In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel, Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah became king. 33When he was twenty-five years old, he became king [over Judah], and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerusha daughter of Zadok. 34He did what was right in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that his father Uzziah had done. 35Only [the altars on] the high places were not removed; the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places [rather than in the temple]. He built the upper gate of the house of the LORD. 36Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of Judah’s Kings? 37In those days the LORD began sending Rezin the king of Aram (Syria) and [Israel’s king] Pekah the son of Remaliah against Judah. 38Jotham slept with his fathers [in death], and was buried with them in the City of David his father (ancestor). Ahaz his son became king in his place.

2 Kings 16
Ahaz Reigns Over Judah

1In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jotham, king of Judah, became king. 2Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the sight of the LORD his God, as his father (ancestor) David had done. 3Instead he walked in the way of the [idolatrous] kings of Israel, and even made his son pass through the fire [as a human sacrifice], in accordance with the repulsive [and idolatrous] practices of the [pagan] nations whom the LORD drove out before the Israelites. 4He also sacrificed and burned incense on the high places and on the hills and under every green tree.

5Then Rezin the king of Aram (Syria) and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, came up to Jerusalem to wage war. They besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome and conquer him. 6At that time Rezin king of Aram recovered Elath [in Edom] for Aram, and drove the Jews away from it. The Arameans came to Elath, and live there to this day.

Ahaz Seeks Help of Assyria 7So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, “I am your servant and son. Come up and rescue me from the hand of the kings of Aram and of Israel, who are rising up against me.” 8And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king’s house, and sent a gift to the king of Assyria. 9So the king of Assyria listened to him; and he went up against Damascus and captured it, and carried its people away into exile to Kir, and put Rezin [king of Aram] to death.

Damascus Falls 10Now King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-pileser the king of Assyria, and saw the pagan altar which was at Damascus. Then King Ahaz sent a model of the altar to Urijah the priest along with a [detailed] pattern for all its construction. 11So Urijah the priest built an altar; in accordance with everything that King Ahaz had sent from Damascus, that is how Urijah the priest made it before King Ahaz returned from Damascus. 12When the king came from Damascus, he saw the altar; then the king approached the altar and offered [sacrifices] on it, 13and burned his burnt offering and his grain offering, and poured out his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings on the altar. 14He brought the bronze altar, which was before the LORD, from the front of the house (temple), from between the [new] altar and the house of the LORD, and put it on the north side of the [new] altar. 15Then King Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, “Upon the great [new] altar, burn the morning burnt offering and the evening grain offering, and the king’s burnt offering and his grain offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land and their grain offering and their drink offerings; and sprinkle on the new altar all the blood of the burnt offering and all the blood of the sacrifice. But the [old] bronze altar shall be kept for me to use to examine the sacrifices.” 16Urijah the priest acted in accordance with everything that King Ahaz commanded.

17Then King Ahaz cut away the frames of the basin stands [in the temple], and removed the basin from [each of] them; and he took down the [large] Sea from the bronze oxen which were under it, and put it on a plastered stone floor. 18He removed from the house of the LORD the covered way for the Sabbath which they had built in the house, and the outer entrance of the king, because of the king of Assyria [who might confiscate them]. Hezekiah Reigns over Judah 19Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 20So Ahaz slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried with his fathers in the City of David; and his son Hezekiah became king in his place.

2 Kings 17
Hoshea Reigns Over Israel

1In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, Hoshea the son of Elah became king over Israel in Samaria, and reigned for nine years. 2He did evil in the sight of the LORD, but not as the kings of Israel who came before him. 3Shalmaneser [V] king of Assyria came up against him, and Hoshea became his servant and paid him tribute (money). 4But the king of Assyria discovered a conspiracy in Hoshea, who sent messengers to So, king of Egypt, and offered no tribute to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year; therefore the king of Assyria arrested him and bound him in prison.

5Then the king of Assyria invaded all the land [of Israel] and went up to Samaria and besieged it for three years. Israel Captive 6In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria took Samaria and carried [the people of] Israel into exile to Assyria, and settled them in Halah and in Habor, by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.

Why Israel Fell 7Now this came about because the Israelites had sinned against the LORD their God, who had brought them up from the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and they had feared [and worshiped] other gods 8and walked in the customs of the [pagan] nations whom the LORD had driven out before the sons (descendants) of Israel, and in the pagan customs of the kings of Israel which they had introduced. 9The Israelites ascribed things to the LORD their God which were not true. They built for themselves high places [of worship] in all their towns, from [the lonely] lookout tower to the [populous] fortified city. 10They set up for themselves sacred pillars (memorial stones) and Asherim on every high hill and under every green tree. 11There they burned incense on all the high places, just as the [pagan] nations whom the LORD had deported before them; and they did evil and contemptible things, provoking the LORD [to anger]. 12And they served idols, of which the LORD had said to them, “You shall not do this thing.” 13Yet the LORD warned Israel and Judah through all His prophets and every seer, saying, “Turn from your evil ways and keep My commandments and My statutes, in accordance with all the Law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by My servants the prophets.” 14However they did not listen, but stiffened their necks as did their fathers who did not believe (trust in, rely on, remain steadfast to) the LORD their God. 15They rejected His statutes and His covenant which He made with their fathers, as well as His warnings that he gave them. And they followed vanity [that is, false gods, idols] and became vain (empty-headed). They followed the [pagan practices of the] nations which surrounded them, although the LORD had commanded that they were not to do as they did. 16They abandoned all the commandments of the LORD their God and made for themselves cast images of two calves; and they made an Asherah [idol] and worshiped all the [starry] host of heaven and served Baal. 17They made their sons and their daughters pass through the fire [as human sacrifices], and used divination [to foretell the future] and enchantments; and they sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger. 18Therefore the LORD was very angry with Israel and removed them from His sight; none [of the tribes] was left except the tribe of Judah.

19Judah did not keep the commandments of the LORD their God either, but walked in the customs which Israel introduced. 20So the LORD rejected all the descendants of Israel (Jacob) and [repeatedly] afflicted them and handed them over to plunderers, until He had cast them out of His sight.

21When He had torn Israel from the [royal] house of David, they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king. And Jeroboam drove Israel away from following the LORD and made them commit a great sin. 22For the Israelites walked in all the [idolatrous] sins which Jeroboam committed; they did not turn from them 23until the LORD removed Israel from His sight, just as He had foretold through all His servants the prophets. So Israel went into exile from their own land to Assyria to this day [the date of this writing].

Cities of Israel Filled with Strangers 24The king of Assyria brought men from Babylon and from Cuthah and from Avva and from Hamath and Sepharvaim, and settled them in the cities of Samaria in place of the sons (people) of Israel. They took possession of Samaria and lived in its cities. 25Now when they began to live there, they did not fear the LORD; therefore the LORD sent lions among them which killed some of them. 26So the king of Assyria was told, “The nations whom you have sent into exile and settled in the cities of Samaria do not know the custom of the god of the land; so He has sent lions among them, and they are killing them because they do not know the manner of [worship demanded by] the god of the land.”

27Then the king of Assyria commanded, “Take back [to Samaria] one of the priests whom you brought from there, and have him go and live there; and have him teach the people the custom of the god of the land.” 28So one of the priests whom they had exiled from Samaria came [back] and lived in Bethel and taught them how they should fear [and worship] the LORD.

29But every nation still made gods of its own and put them in the houses (shrines) of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in the cities where they lived. 30The men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth, the men of Cuth made Nergal, the men of Hamath made Ashima, 31the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak; and the Sepharvites burned their children in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim. 32They also feared the LORD and appointed from among themselves priests of the high places, who sacrificed for them in the houses of the high places. 33They feared the LORD, yet served their own gods, following the custom of the nations from among whom they had been sent into exile.

34To this day they act in accordance with their former [pagan] customs: they do not [really] fear the LORD, nor do they obey their statutes and ordinances, nor the law, nor the commandments which the LORD commanded the sons (descendants) of Jacob, whom He named Israel; 35with whom the LORD had made a covenant and commanded them, saying, “You shall not fear other gods or bow yourselves to them nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them. 36But the LORD, who brought you up from the land of Egypt with great power and an outstretched arm, Him you shall fear, and to Him you shall bow yourselves down, and to Him you shall sacrifice. 37The statutes and the ordinances and the law and the commandment which He wrote for you [by the hand of Moses], you shall observe and do forever. You shall not fear (worship, serve) other gods. 38The covenant that I have made with you, you shall not forget; you shall not fear other gods. 39“But the LORD your God you shall fear [and worship]; then He will rescue you from the hands of all your enemies.” 40However, they did not listen, but they acted in accordance with their former custom. 41So these nations [superficially] feared the LORD; they also served their idols, as did their children and their children’s children, just as their fathers did, so do they to this day [the date of this writing].

2 Kings 18
Hezekiah Reigns Over Judah

1Now it came about in the third year of Hoshea the son of Elah king of Israel, Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah became king. 2He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abi the daughter of Zechariah. 3Hezekiah did right in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that David his father (ancestor) had done. 4He removed the high places [of pagan worship], broke down the images (memorial stones) and cut down the Asherim. He also crushed to pieces the bronze serpent that Moses had made, for until those days the Israelites had burned incense to it; and it was called Nehushtan [a bronze sculpture]. 5Hezekiah trusted in and relied confidently on the LORD, the God of Israel; so that after him there was no one like him among all the kings of Judah, nor among those who were before him. 6For he clung to the LORD; he did not turn away from [faithfully] following Him, but he kept His commandments, which the LORD had commanded Moses. Hezekiah Victorious 7And the LORD was with Hezekiah; he was successful wherever he went. And he rebelled against the king of Assyria and refused to serve him. 8He defeated the Philistines as far as Gaza [the most distant city] and its borders, from the [isolated] lookout tower to the [populous] fortified city.

9Now in the fourth year of King Hezekiah, which was the seventh of Hoshea the son of Elah king of Israel, Shalmaneser the king of Assyria went up against Samaria and besieged it. 10At the end of three years they captured it; in the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Israel, Samaria was taken. 11Then the king of Assyria sent Israel into exile to Assyria, and put them in Halah, and on the Habor, the river of [the city of] Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes, 12because they did not obey the voice of the LORD their God, but broke His covenant, everything that Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded; and they would not listen nor do it.

Invasion of Judah 13In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria went up against all the fortified cities of Judah [except Jerusalem] and captured them. 14Then Hezekiah king of Judah sent word to the king of Assyria at Lachish, saying, “I have done wrong. Withdraw from me; whatever you impose on me I will bear.” So the king of Assyria imposed on Hezekiah king of Judah [a tribute tax of] three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold. 15Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house (temple) of the LORD, and in the treasuries of the king’s house (palace). 16At that time Hezekiah cut away the gold framework from the doors of the temple of the LORD and from the doorposts which he had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria.

17Then the king of Assyria sent the Tartan and the Rab-saris and the Rabshakeh [his highest officials] with a large army, from Lachish to King Hezekiah at Jerusalem. They went up and came to Jerusalem, and when they went up and arrived, they stood by the aqueduct of the upper pool, which is on the road of the Fuller’s Field. 18When they called for the king, Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was in charge of the [king’s] household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the secretary went out to [meet] them.

19Then the Rabshakeh said to them, “Say to Hezekiah, ‘Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria, “What is [the reason for] this confidence that you have? 20You say (but they are only empty words) ‘I have counsel and strength for the war.’ Now on whom do you rely, that you have rebelled against me? 21Now pay attention: you are relying on Egypt, on that staff of crushed reed; if a man leans on it, it will only go into his hand and pierce it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust and rely on him. 22But if you tell me, ‘We trust in and rely on the LORD our God,’ is it not He whose high places and altars Hezekiah has removed, and has said to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You shall worship [only] before this altar in Jerusalem’? 23Now then, make a bargain with my lord the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses, if on your part you can put riders on them. 24How then can you drive back even one official of the least of my master’s servants, when you rely on Egypt for chariots and horsemen? 25“Now have I come up against this place to destroy it without the LORD’S approval? The LORD said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”’”

26Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebna and Joah, said to the Rabshakeh, “Please speak to your servants in the Aramaic (Syrian) language, because we understand it; and do not speak with us in the Judean (Hebrew) language in the hearing of the people who are on the wall.” 27But the Rabshakeh said to them, “Has my master sent me only to your master and to you to say these things? Has he not sent me to the men who sit on the wall, [who are doomed by the siege] to eat their own excrement and drink their own urine along with you?”

28Then the Rabshakeh stood and shouted out with a loud voice in Judean (Hebrew), “Hear the word of the great king, the king of Assyria. 29Thus says the king, ‘Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to rescue you from my hand; 30nor let Hezekiah make you trust in and rely on the LORD, saying, “The LORD will certainly rescue us, and this city [of Jerusalem] will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.” 31‘Do not listen to Hezekiah, for thus says the king of Assyria: Surrender to me and come out to [meet] me, and every man may eat from his own vine and fig tree, and every man may drink the waters of his own well, 32until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and honey, so that you may live and not die.” Do not listen to Hezekiah when he misleads and incites you, saying, “The LORD will rescue us!” 33‘Has any one of the gods of the nations ever rescued his land from the hand of the king of Assyria? 34‘Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad [in Aram]? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah [in the valley of the Euphrates]? Have they rescued Samaria (Israel’s capital) from my hand? 35‘Who among all the gods of the lands have rescued their lands from my hand, that the LORD would rescue Jerusalem from my hand?’”

36But the people kept silent and did not answer him, for the king had commanded, “Do not answer him.” 37Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was in charge of the [royal] household, and Shebna the scribe and Joah the son of Asaph the secretary, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn [in grief and despair] and told him what the Rabshakeh had said.

2 Kings 19
Isaiah Encourages Hezekiah

1When king Hezekiah heard it, he tore his clothes and he covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house (temple) of the LORD. 2Then he sent Eliakim who was in charge of his household, Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz. 3They said to him, “Thus says Hezekiah, ‘This is a day of distress and anxiety, of punishment and humiliation; for children have come to [the time of their] birth and there is no strength to rescue them. 4‘It may be that the LORD your God will hear all the words of the Rabshakeh, whom his master the king of Assyria has sent to taunt and defy the living God, and will rebuke the words which the LORD your God has heard. So offer a prayer for the remnant [of His people] that is left [in Judah].’” 5So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah. 6Isaiah said to them, “Say this to your master: ‘Thus says the LORD, “Do not be afraid because of the words that you have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have reviled (blasphemed) Me. 7“Behold, I will put a spirit in him so that he will hear a rumor and return to his own land. And I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”

Sennacherib Defies God 8So the Rabshakeh returned and found the king of Assyria fighting against Libnah [a fortified city of Judah]; for he had heard that the king had left Lachish. 9When the king heard them say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, “Behold, he has come out to make war against you,” he sent messengers again to Hezekiah, saying, 10“Say this to Hezekiah king of Judah, ‘Do not let your God on whom you rely deceive you by saying, “Jerusalem shall not be handed over to the king of Assyria.” 11‘Listen, you have heard what the Assyrian kings have done to all the lands, destroying them completely. So will you be spared? 12‘Did the gods of the nations whom my forefathers destroyed rescue them—Gozan and Haran [of Mesopotamia] and Rezeph and the people of Eden who were in Telassar? 13‘Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad [of northern Syria], the king of the city of Sepharvaim, and of Hena and Ivvah?’”

Hezekiah’s Prayer 14Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers and read it. Then he went up to the house (temple) of the LORD and spread it out before the LORD. 15Hezekiah prayed before the LORD and said, “O LORD, the God of Israel, who is enthroned above the cherubim [of the ark in the temple], You are the God, You alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. You have made the heavens and the earth. 16O LORD, bend down Your ear and hear; LORD, open Your eyes and see; hear the [taunting] words of Sennacherib, which he has sent to taunt and defy the living God. 17It is true, LORD, that the Assyrian kings have devastated the nations and their lands 18and have thrown their gods into the fire, for they were not [real] gods but [only] the work of men’s hands, wood and stone. So they [could destroy them and] have destroyed them. 19“Now, O LORD our God, please, save us from his hand so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know [without any doubt] that You alone, O LORD, are God.”

God’s Answer through Isaiah 20Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent word to Hezekiah, saying, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘I have heard your prayer to Me regarding Sennacherib king of Assyria.’ 21This is the word that the LORD has spoken against him:
‘The virgin daughter of Zion
Has despised you and mocked you;
The daughter of Jerusalem
Has shaken her head behind you!
22‘Whom have you taunted and blasphemed?
Against whom have you raised your voice,
And haughtily lifted up your eyes?
Against the Holy One of Israel!
23‘Through your messengers you have taunted and defied the Lord,
And have said [boastfully], “With my many chariots
I came up to the heights of the mountains,
To the remotest parts of Lebanon;
I cut down its tall cedar trees and its choicest cypress trees.
I entered its most distant lodging, its densest forest.
24“I dug wells and drank foreign waters,
And with the sole of my feet I dried up
All the rivers of [the Lower Nile of] Egypt.”
25‘Have you not heard [asks the God of Israel]?
Long ago I did it;
From ancient times I planned it.
Now I have brought it to pass,
That you [king of Assyria] should [be My instrument to] turn fortified cities into ruinous heaps.
26‘Therefore their inhabitants were powerless,
They were shattered [in spirit] and put to shame;
They were like plants of the field, the green herb,
As grass on the housetops is scorched before it is grown up.
27‘But I [the LORD] know your sitting down [O Sennacherib],
Your going out, your coming in,
And your raging against Me.
28‘Because of your raging against Me,
And because your arrogance and complacency have come up to My ears,
I will put My hook in your nose,
And My bridle in your lips,
And I will turn you back [to Assyria] by the way that you came.

29‘Then this shall be the sign [of these things] to you [Hezekiah]: this year you will eat what grows of itself, in the second year what springs up voluntarily, and in the third year sow and reap, plant vineyards, and eat their fruit. 30‘The survivors who remain of the house of Judah will again take root downward and bear fruit upward. 31‘For a remnant will go forth from Jerusalem, and [a band of] survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of the LORD of hosts shall perform this.

32‘Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the king of Assyria: “He will not come to this city [Jerusalem] nor shoot an arrow there; nor will he come before it with a shield nor throw up a siege ramp against it. 33“By the way that he came, by the same way he will return, and he will not come into this city,”’ declares the LORD. 34‘For I will protect this city to save it, for My own sake and for My servant David’s sake.’”

35Then it came to pass that night, that the angel of the LORD went forth and struck down 185,000 [men] in the camp of the Assyrians; when the survivors got up early in the morning, behold, all [185,000] of them were dead. 36So Sennacherib king of Assyria left and returned home, and lived at Nineveh. 37It came about as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer killed him with a sword; and they escaped to the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son became king in his place.
2 Kings 20
Hezekiah’s Illness And Recovery

1In those days [when Sennacherib first invaded Judah] Hezekiah became deathly ill. The prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz came and said to him, “Thus says the LORD, ‘Set your house in order, for you shall die and not recover.’” 2Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the LORD, saying, 3“Please, O LORD, remember now [with compassion] how I have walked before You in faithfulness and truth and with a whole heart [entirely devoted to You], and have done what is good in Your sight.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly. 4Before Isaiah had gone out of the middle courtyard, the word of the LORD came to him, saying, 5“Go back and tell Hezekiah the leader of My people, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of David your father (ancestor): “I have heard your prayer, I have seen your tears. Behold, I am healing you; on the third day you shall go up to the house of the LORD. 6“I will add fifteen years to your life and save you and this city [Jerusalem] from the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will protect this city for My own sake and for My servant David’s sake.”’” 7Then Isaiah said, “Bring a cake of figs. And they brought it and placed it on the [painful] inflammation, and he recovered.”

8Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “What will be the sign that the LORD will [completely] heal me, and that I shall go up to the house of the LORD on the third day?” 9Isaiah said, “This will be the sign to you from the LORD, that He will do the thing that He has spoken: shall the shadow [indicating the time of day] go forward ten steps, or go backward ten steps?” 10Hezekiah answered, “It is easy for the shadow to go forward ten steps; no, but let the shadow turn backward ten steps.” 11So Isaiah the prophet called out to the LORD, and He brought the shadow on the steps ten steps backward by which it had gone down on the sundial of Ahaz.

Hezekiah Shows Babylon His Treasures 12At that time Berodach-baladan a son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah, for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick. 13Hezekiah listened to and welcomed them and [foolishly] showed them all his treasure house—the silver and gold and spices and precious oil and his armory and everything that was found in his treasuries. There was nothing in his house (palace) nor in all his realm that Hezekiah did not show them. 14Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah and said to him, “What did these men say [that would cause you to do this for them]? From where have they come to you?” Hezekiah said, “They have come from a far country, from Babylon.” 15Isaiah said, “What have they seen in your house?” Hezekiah answered, “They have seen everything that is in my house (palace). There is nothing in my treasuries that I have not shown them.”

16Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the LORD. 17‘Behold, the time is coming when everything that is in your house, and that your fathers have stored up until this day, will be carried to Babylon; nothing will be left,’ says the LORD. 18‘And some of your sons (descendants) who will be born to you will be taken away [as captives]; and they will become eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.’” 19Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The word of the LORD which you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “Is it not good, if [at least] there will be peace and security in my lifetime?”

20The rest of the acts of Hezekiah and all his might, and how he made the [Siloam] pool and the aqueduct and brought water into the city, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 21Hezekiah slept with his fathers [in death], and Manasseh his son became king in his place.
2 Kings 21
Manasseh Succeeds Hezekiah

1Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned for fifty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hephzibah. 2He did [great] evil in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with the [idolatrous] repulsive acts of the [pagan] nations whom the LORD dispossessed before the sons (descendants) of Israel. 3For he rebuilt the high places [for the worship of pagan gods] which his father Hezekiah had destroyed; and he set up altars for Baal and made an [image of] Asherah, just as Ahab king of Israel had done, and he worshiped all the [starry] host of heaven and served them. 4And he built [pagan] altars in the house (temple) of the LORD, of which the LORD had said, “In Jerusalem I will put My Name (Presence).” 5And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courtyards of the house of the LORD. 6He made his son pass through the fire and burned him [as an offering to Molech]; he practiced witchcraft and divination, and dealt with mediums and soothsayers. He did great evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger. 7He made a carved image of the [goddess] Asherah and set it up in the house (temple), of which the LORD said to David and to his son Solomon, “In this house and in Jerusalem [in the tribe of Judah], which I have chosen from all the tribes of Israel, I will put My Name forever. 8“And I will not make the feet of Israel wander anymore from the land which I gave their fathers, if only they will be careful to act in accordance with everything that I have commanded them, and with all the law that My servant Moses commanded them.” 9But they did not listen; and Manasseh seduced them to do more evil than the nations whom the LORD destroyed before the sons (descendants) of Israel.

The King’s Idolatries Rebuked 10Now the LORD spoke through His servants the prophets, saying, 11“Because Manasseh king of Judah has committed these repulsive acts, having done more evil than all the Amorites did who were before him, and has also made Judah sin with his idols; 12therefore thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘Behold, I am bringing such catastrophe on Jerusalem and Judah, that everyone who hears of it, both of his ears will ring [from the shock]. 13‘I will stretch over Jerusalem the measuring line of Samaria and the plummet of the house of Ahab; and I will wipe Jerusalem clean just as one wipes a [dirty] bowl clean, wiping it and turning it upside down. 14‘I will abandon the remnant (remainder) of My inheritance and hand them over to their enemies; and they will become plunder and spoil to all their enemies, 15because they have done evil in My sight, and have been provoking Me to anger, since the day their fathers came from Egypt to this day.’”

16Moreover, Manasseh shed a very great quantity of innocent blood, until he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; besides his sin with which he made Judah sin, by doing evil in the sight of the LORD. 17Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, everything that he did, and the sin that he committed, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 18Manasseh slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza. And his son Amon became king in his place.

Amon Succeeds Manasseh 19Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Meshullemeth the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah. 20He also did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as his father Manasseh had done. 21He walked in all the [evil] ways that his father had walked; and he served the idols that his father had served, and worshiped them; 22he abandoned the LORD, the God of his fathers, and did not walk in the way of the LORD. 23But the servants of Amon conspired against him and killed the king in his own house (palace). 24Then the people of the land [of Judah] killed all those who had conspired against King Amon, and the people of the land made his son Josiah king in his place. 25Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 26He was buried in his tomb in the garden of Uzza, and his son Josiah became king in his place.

2 Kings 22
Josiah Succeeds Amon

1Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and reigned for thirty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jedidah daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath. 2He did what was right in the sight of the LORD and walked in all the ways of his father (ancestor) David, and did not turn aside to the right or to the left.

3In the eighteenth year of King Josiah, the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam the scribe to the house of the LORD, saying, 4“Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, so that he may count the entire amount of money brought into the house of the LORD, which the doorkeepers have collected from the people. 5And have them deliver it to the hands of the workmen who have been appointed over the house of the LORD, and have them give it to the workmen who are in the house of the LORD to repair the damages of the house— 6that is, [have them give the money] to the carpenters and the builders and the masons—and to buy timber and cut stones to repair the house (temple). 7“However, no accounting shall be required of them for the money placed in their hands, because they act faithfully.”

The Lost Book 8Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Law in the house (temple) of the LORD.” Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it. 9Shaphan the scribe came to the king and brought back word to him: “Your servants have emptied out the money that was found in the house, and have placed it in the hands of the workmen who have been appointed over the house of the LORD.” 10Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a book.” And Shaphan read it [aloud] before the king.

11Now when the king heard the words of the Book of the Law, he tore his clothes. 12Then the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam the son of Shaphan, Achbor the son of Micaiah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the servant of the king, saying, 13“Go, inquire of the LORD for my sake and for the sake of the people and for all Judah concerning the words of this book which has been found, for great is the wrath of the LORD which has been kindled against us, because our fathers have not listened to and obeyed the words of this book, so as to act in accordance with everything that is written concerning us.”

Huldah Predicts 14So Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam, Achbor, Shaphan, and Asaiah went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe (she was living in Jerusalem, in the Second Quarter [the new part of the city]); and they spoke to her. 15She said to them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘Tell the man who sent you to me, 16thus says the LORD: “Behold, I am bringing a catastrophe on this place (Judah) and on its inhabitants, [according to] all the words of the book which the king of Judah has read. 17“Because they have abandoned (rejected) Me and have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke Me to anger with all the work of their hands, therefore My wrath burns against this place, and it will not be quenched.”’ 18But to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of the LORD, you shall say this to him: ‘Thus says the LORD God of Israel, Regarding the words which you have heard, 19because your heart was tender (receptive, penitent) and you humbled yourself before the LORD when you heard what I said against this place and against its inhabitants, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and because you have torn your clothes and wept before Me, I have heard you,” declares the LORD. 20“Therefore, behold, [King Josiah,] I will gather you to your fathers, and you will be taken to your grave in peace, and your eyes will not see all the evil (catastrophe) which I will bring on this place.”’” So they brought back word to the king.

2 Kings 23
Josiah’s Covenant

1King Josiah sent word and they brought to him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem. 2The king went up to the house of the LORD, and with him all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests, the prophets, and all the people, both small and great; and he read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant which was found in the house (temple) of the LORD. 3The king stood by the pillar and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD and to keep His commandments, His testimonies, and His statutes with all his heart and soul, to confirm the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people entered into the covenant.

Reforms under Josiah 4Then the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest and the priests of the second rank and the doorkeepers to bring out of the temple of the LORD all the articles made for Baal, for [the goddess] Asherah, and for all the [starry] host of heaven; and he burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields of the Kidron, and carried their ashes to Bethel [where Israel’s idolatry began]. 5He got rid of the idolatrous priests whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense [to pagan gods] in the high places in Judah’s cities and all around Jerusalem—also those who burned incense to Baal, to the sun, to the moon, to the constellations [of the zodiac], and to all the [starry] host of heaven. 6Josiah brought out the Asherah from the house of the LORD to the Brook Kidron outside Jerusalem, and burned it there, and ground it to dust, and threw its dust on the graves of the common people [who had sacrificed to it]. 7And he tore down the houses of the [male] cult prostitutes, which were at the house (temple) of the LORD, where the women were weaving [tent] hangings for the Asherah [shrines]. 8Then Josiah brought all the [idolatrous] priests from the cities of Judah, and desecrated the high places where the priests had burned incense [to idols], from Geba to Beersheba, [that is, north to south]; and he tore down the high places of the gates which were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on one’s left at the city gate. 9However, the priests of the high places were not allowed to go up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem [to serve], but they ate unleavened bread among their brothers. 10Josiah also defiled Topheth, which is in the Valley of Ben-hinnom (son of Hinnom), so that no man could make his son or his daughter pass through the fire [as a burnt offering] for Molech. 11And he got rid of the horses that the kings of Judah had given [in worship] to the sun at the entrance of the house of the LORD, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the official, which was in the annex; and he burned the chariots of the sun. 12The altars [dedicated to the starry host of heaven] which were on the roof, the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courtyards of the house of the LORD, the king tore down; and he smashed them there and threw their dust into the Brook Kidron. 13The king desecrated the high places which were opposite [east of] Jerusalem, which were on the right (south) of the mount of corruption which Solomon the king of Israel had built for Ashtoreth the repulsiveness of the Sidonians, for Chemosh the repulsiveness of Moab, and for Milcom the repulsiveness of the sons (descendants) of Ammon. 14He broke in pieces the sacred pillars (cultic memorial stones, images) and cut down the Asherim and replaced them with human bones [to desecrate the places forever].

15Further, the altar that was at Bethel, the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin, had made, even that altar and the high place he tore down. Then he demolished its stones, ground them to dust, and burned the Asherah. 16And as Josiah turned, he saw the graves that were there on the mountain, and he sent men and had the bones taken from the graves, and burned them on the altar and [thereby] desecrated it, in accordance with the word of the LORD which the man of God prophesied, who proclaimed these things [about this altar, naming Josiah before he was born]. 17Then Josiah said, “What is this monument (gravestone) that I see?” The men of the city told him, “It is the grave of the man of God who came from Judah and proclaimed these things which you have done to the altar of Bethel.” 18He said, “Let him alone; let no one disturb his bones.” So they left his bones undisturbed, with the bones of the prophet who came from Samaria. 19Josiah also removed all the houses of the high places which were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made provoking the LORD [to anger]; and he did to them just as he had done [to those] in Bethel. 20All the priests of the high places who were there he slaughtered on the altars, and burned human bones on them [to desecrate the places forever]. Then he returned to Jerusalem.

Passover Reinstituted 21Then the king commanded all the people, saying, “Celebrate the Passover to the LORD your God as it is written in this book of the covenant.” 22Indeed, such a Passover as this had not been held since the days of the judges who judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel and the kings of Judah. 23But in the eighteenth year of King Josiah, this Passover to the LORD was kept in Jerusalem.

24Moreover, Josiah removed the mediums and the soothsayers and the teraphim (household gods) and the idols and all the repulsive things that were seen in Judah and in Jerusalem, so that he might fulfill the words of the law written in the book which Hilkiah the priest found in the house (temple) of the LORD. 25Before him there was no king like Josiah who turned to the LORD with all his heart and all his soul and all his might, in accordance with all the Law of Moses; nor did anyone like him arise after him.

26However, the LORD did not turn from the fierceness of His great wrath which was kindled against Judah because of all the despicable acts with which Manasseh had provoked Him. 27The LORD said, “I will also remove Judah from My sight, just as I have removed Israel; and will reject this city which I have chosen, this Jerusalem, and the house, of which I said, ‘My Name [and the pledge of My Presence] shall be there.’”

Jehoahaz Succeeds Josiah 28Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? 29In his days Pharaoh Neco (Necho) king of Egypt went up to the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates [to help him fight Nabopolassar the king of Babylon]. King Josiah went out to meet him, but Pharaoh killed Josiah at Megiddo when he saw him. 30Josiah’s servants carried his dead body in a chariot from Megiddo, brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own tomb. Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah and anointed him and made him king in his father’s place.

31Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned for [only] three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 32He did evil in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that his forefathers had done. 33Pharaoh Neco imprisoned him at Riblah in the land of Hamath, so that he would not reign in Jerusalem, and imposed a fine on the land of a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold. Jehoiakim Made King by Pharaoh 34Pharaoh Neco made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in place of his father Josiah, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. But he took Jehoahaz and brought him to Egypt, where he died. 35Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh, but he taxed the land to give the money as Pharaoh commanded. He collected the silver and gold from the people of the land, from everyone according to his assessment, to give it to Pharaoh Neco.

36Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zebidah daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. 37He did evil in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that his forefathers had done.

2 Kings 24
Babylon Controls Jehoiakim

1In his days, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant for three years; then he turned and rebelled against him. 2The LORD sent marauding bands of Chaldeans, Arameans (Syrians), Moabites, and Ammonites against Jehoiakim. And He sent them against Judah to destroy it, in accordance with the word of the LORD which He spoke through His servants the prophets. 3Surely this came on Judah at the command of the LORD, to remove them from His sight because of the sins of [King] Manasseh, in accordance with everything that he had done, 4and also for the innocent blood that he shed, for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; and the LORD would not pardon it. 5Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and everything that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? Jehoiachin Reigns 6So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers [in death], and his son Jehoiachin became king in his place. 7The king of Egypt did not come out of his land again, because the king of Babylon had taken everything that belonged to the king of Egypt, from the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates.

8Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, and he reigned [only] three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Nehushta daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. 9He did evil in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that his father had done.

Deportation to Babylon 10At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon went up to Jerusalem, and the city came under siege. 11Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to the city while his servants were besieging it. 12Jehoiachin king of Judah surrendered to the king of Babylon, he and his mother and his servants and his captains and his [palace] officials. So the king of Babylon took him prisoner in the eighth year of his [own] reign. 13He carried out of there (Jerusalem) all the treasures of the house (temple) of the LORD, and the treasures of the house (palace) of the king, and cut in pieces all the articles of gold in the temple of the LORD, which Solomon king of Israel had made, just as the LORD had said. 14He led away into exile all Jerusalem and all the captains and all the brave men, ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and the smiths. None remained except the poorest people of the land.

15Nebuchadnezzar led Jehoiachin away into exile to Babylon; also he took the king’s mother and the king’s wives and his officials and the leading men of the land [including Ezekiel] as exiles from Jerusalem to Babylon. 16And the king of Babylon brought as exiles to Babylon all the brave men, seven thousand [of them], and the craftsmen and the smiths, a thousand [of them], all strong and fit for war. Zedekiah Made King 17Then the king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin’s uncle, king in his place, and changed his name to Zedekiah.

18Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 19He did evil in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that Jehoiakim had done. 20Because of the anger of the LORD these things happened in Jerusalem and Judah, and it [finally] came to the point that He cast them from His presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

2 Kings 25
Nebuchadnezzar Besieges Jerusalem

1Now in the ninth year of Zedekiah’s reign, on the tenth day of the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he with all his army, against Jerusalem, and camped against it and built siege works surrounding it. 2The city came under siege [for nearly two years] until the eleventh year of King Zedekiah. 3On the ninth day of the fourth month the famine [caused by the siege] was severe in the city; there was no food for the people of the land. 4Then the city [wall] was broken into [and conquered]; all the men of war fled by night by way of the gate between the two walls by the king’s garden, though the Chaldeans (Babylonians) were all around the city. And they went by way of the Arabah (the plain of the Jordan). 5The army of the Chaldeans pursued the king and overtook him in the plains of Jericho. Then his entire army was dispersed from him. 6So they seized the king (Zedekiah) and brought him to the king of Babylon at Riblah [on the Orontes River], and sentence was passed on him. 7They slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, then put out the eyes of Zedekiah and bound him [hand and foot] with bronze fetters and brought him to Babylon.

Jerusalem Burned and Plundered 8On the seventh day of the fifth month in the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, Nebuzaradan, captain of the bodyguard, a servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem. 9He burned the house (temple) of the LORD, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; every great house he burned down. 10All the army of the Chaldeans (Babylonians) who were with the captain of the bodyguard tore down the walls around Jerusalem. 11Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the bodyguard deported [into exile] the rest of the people who were left in the city and the deserters who had joined the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude. 12But the captain of the bodyguard left some of the unimportant and poorest people of the land to be vineyard workers and farmers.

13Now the Chaldeans (Babylonians) smashed the bronze pillars which were in the house of the LORD and their bases and the bronze sea (large basin) which were in the house of the LORD, and carried the bronze to Babylon. 14They took away the pots, the shovels, the snuffers, the spoons, and all the bronze articles which were used in the temple service, 15the captain of the bodyguard also took away the firepans and basins, anything made of fine gold and anything made of fine silver. 16The two pillars, the one sea (large basin), and the bases which Solomon had made for the house of the LORD, the bronze of all these articles was incalculable. 17The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits (27 ft.), and a capital of bronze was on top of it. The height of the capital was three cubits (4.5 ft.); a network (lattice work) and pomegranates around the capital were all of bronze. And the second pillar had the same as these, with a network.

18The captain of the bodyguard took [captive] Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the second priest, and the three doorkeepers [of the temple]. 19And from the city [of Jerusalem] he took an officer who was in command of the men of war, and five men from the king’s personal advisors who were found in the city, and the scribe of the captain of the army who mustered the people of the land [for military service] and sixty men from the people of the land who were found in the city. 20Nebuzaradan the captain of the bodyguard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah. 21Then the king of Babylon struck them down and killed them at Riblah in the land of Hamath [north of Damascus]. So Judah was taken into exile from its land.

Gedaliah Made Governor 22Now over the people whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left in the land of Judah, he appointed [as governor] Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan. 23When all the captains of the forces, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah governor, they came with their men to Gedaliah at Mizpah, namely, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite. 24Gedaliah swore [an oath] to them and their men, and said to them, “Do not be afraid of the servants (officials) of the Chaldeans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will be well with you.”

25But in the seventh month Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the royal family [who had a claim to be governor], came with ten men and struck and killed Gedaliah and the Jews and the Chaldeans who were with him at Mizpah. 26Then all the people, both small and great, and the captains of the forces set out and went to Egypt; for they were afraid of the Chaldeans (Babylonians).

27Now it came about in the thirty-seventh year of the exile of Jehoiachin king of Judah, on the twenty-seventh day of the twelfth month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he became king, showed favor to Jehoiachin king of Judah and released him from prison; 28and he spoke kindly to him and set his throne above the throne of the [other] kings [of captive peoples] who were with him in Babylon. 29Jehoiachin changed his prison clothes [for palace garments] and he dined regularly in the king’s presence for the remainder of his life; 30and his allowance, a continual one, was given to him by the king (Evil-meridach), a portion every day, for the rest of his life.

1 Chronicles 1
Genealogy From Adam

1Adam [his genealogical line], Seth, Enosh, 2Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared, 3Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, 4Noah, [and his sons] Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

5The sons (descendants) of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras. 6The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Diphath, and Togarmah. 7The sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim.

8The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. 9The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raama, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan. 10Cush became the father of Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one upon the earth.

11Mizraim became the father of the people of Lud, Anam, Lehab, Naphtuh, 12Pathrus, and Casluh, from whom came the Philistines, and Caphtor.

13Canaan became the father of Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, 14the Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites, 15Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, 16Arvadites, Zemarites, and Hamathites.

17The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, Aram, Uz, Hul, Gether, and Meshech. 18Arpachshad became the father of Shelah, and Shelah became the father of Eber. 19To Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg, because in his days [the population of] the earth was divided [according to its languages], and his brother’s name was Joktan. 20Joktan became the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah, 21Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, 22Ebal, Abimael, Sheba, 23Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.

24Shem [his genealogical line], Arpachshad, Shelah, 25Eber, Peleg, Reu, 26Serug, Nahor, Terah, 27Abram, the same as Abraham.

Descendants of Abraham 28The sons of Abraham: Isaac [by his wife Sarah] and Ishmael [by Hagar her maid]. 29These are their descendants: The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, 30Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema, 31Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael. 32Now the sons of Keturah, Abraham’s concubine: she gave birth to Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. The sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan. 33The sons of Midian: Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these are the sons [and grandsons] of Keturah.

34Abraham became the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel (Jacob). 35The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. 36The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, Omar, Zephi, Gatam, Kenaz, Timna, and Amalek. 37The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. 38The sons of Seir: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. 39The sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam; and Timna was Lotan’s sister. 40The sons of Shobal: Alian, Manahath, Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. 41The son of Anah: Dishon. The sons of Dishon: Hamran, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran. 42The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.

43These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the sons (descendants) of Israel (Jacob): Bela the son of Beor; the name of his city was Dinhabah. 44When Bela died, Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah became king in his place. 45When Jobab died, Husham of the land of the Temanites became king in his place. 46When Husham died, Hadad [I of Edom] the son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the field of Moab, became king in his place; the name of his city was Avith. 47When Hadad [I] died, Samlah of Masrekah became king in his place. 48When Samlah died, Shaul of Rehoboth on the River [Euphrates] became king in his place. 49When Shaul died, Baal-hanan the son of Achbor became king in his place. 50When Baal-hanan died, Hadad [II] became king in his place; the name of his city was Pai; his wife’s name was Mehetabel daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab. 51Hadad died also.

The chiefs of Edom were: chiefs Timna, Aliah, Jetheth, 52Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon, 53Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar, 54Magdiel, and Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom.

1 Chronicles 2
Genealogy: Twelve Sons Of Jacob (Israel)

1These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, 2Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

3The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, and Shelah; the three were born to him by Shua’s daughter the Canaanitess. Er, Judah’s eldest, was evil in the LORD’S sight, and He put him to death. 4Tamar, Judah’s daughter-in-law, bore him Perez and Zerah. Judah’s sons were five in all.

5The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul. 6The sons of Zerah: Zimri, Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Dara—five in all. 7The son of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel, who violated the ban [by taking things from Jericho that had been banned]. 8The son of Ethan: Azariah.

Genealogy of David 9The sons of Hezron who were born to him: Jerahmeel, Ram, and Chelubai [that is, Caleb]. 10Ram became the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab became the father of Nahshon, leader of the sons of Judah. 11Nahshon became the father of Salma, Salma became the father of Boaz, 12Boaz became the father of Obed, and Obed became the father of Jesse. 13Jesse became the father of Eliab his firstborn, Abinadab the second, Shimea the third, 14Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth, 15Ozem the sixth, David the seventh. 16Their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. The sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, Joab, and Asahel, three. 17Abigail gave birth to Amasa, and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.

18And Caleb the son of Hezron had sons by his wife Azubah and by Jerioth. Azubah’s sons were: Jesher, Shobab, and Ardon. 19Azubah died, and Caleb married Ephrath, who bore him Hur. 20Hur became the father of Uri, and Uri became the father of Bezalel [the skillful craftsman who made the furnishings of the tabernacle].

21Later, when Hezron was sixty years old, he married the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, and she bore him Segub. 22Segub became the father of Jair, who [later] had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead. 23But Geshur and Aram took from them Havvoth-jair, with Kenath and its villages, sixty towns in all. All these were the sons (descendants) of Machir, the father of Gilead. 24After Hezron died in Caleb-ephrathah, Abijah, Hezron’s wife, bore him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.

25The sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron: Ram the firstborn, Bunah, Oren, Ozem, and Ahijah. 26Jerahmeel had another wife, named Atarah; she was the mother of Onam. 27The sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were: Maaz, Jamin, and Eker. 28The sons of Onam: Shammai and Jada. The sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur. 29The name of Abishur’s wife was Abihail; she bore him Ahban and Molid. 30The sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim. Seled died childless. 31The son of Appaim: Ishi. The son of Ishi: Sheshan. The son of Sheshan: Ahlai. 32The sons of Jada the brother of Shammai: Jether and Jonathan. Jether died childless. 33The sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza. These were the sons (descendants) of Jerahmeel. 34Sheshan had no sons—only daughters. But Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha. 35So Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant as a wife; she bore him Attai. 36Attai became the father of Nathan, and Nathan became the father of Zabad. 37Zabad became the father of Ephlal, and Ephlal became the father of Obed. 38Obed became the father of Jehu, and Jehu became the father of Azariah. 39Azariah became the father of Helez, and Helez became the father of Eleasah. 40Eleasah became the father of Sismai, and Sismai became the father of Shallum. 41Shallum became the father of Jekamiah, and Jekamiah became the father of Elishama.

42The sons of Caleb, the brother of Jerahmeel: Mesha his firstborn was the father of Ziph; and his son Mareshah was the father of Hebron. 43The sons of Hebron: Korah, Tappuah, Rekem, and Shema. 44Shema became the father of Raham, the father of Jorkeam. And Rekem became the father of Shammai. 45The son of Shammai was Maon; Maon became the father of Bethzur. 46Ephah, Caleb’s concubine, gave birth to Haran, Moza, and Gazez; Haran became the father of Gazez. 47The sons of Jahdai: Regem, Jotham, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah, and Shaaph. 48Maacah, Caleb’s concubine, gave birth to Sheber and Tirhanah. 49She also bore Shaaph the father of Madmannah and Sheva the father of Machbena and of Gibea; and the daughter of Caleb was Achsah. 50These were the sons (descendants) of Caleb.

The sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah: Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim, 51Salma the father of Bethlehem and Hareph the father of Beth-gader. 52Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim had [other] sons (descendants): Haroeh, half of the Manahathites [in Judah], 53and the families of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites, Puthites, Shumathites, and Mishraites. From these came the Zorathites and the Eshtaolites. 54The sons (descendants) of Salma: Bethlehem, the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-joab, and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites. 55The families of scribes who lived at Jabez: the Tirathites, Shimeathites, and Sucathites. These are the Kenites who came from Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.

1 Chronicles 3
Family Of David

1These were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebron: the firstborn was Amnon, by Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; second, Daniel (Chileab), by Abigail the Carmelitess; 2third, Absalom the son of Maacah, daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; fourth, Adonijah, the son of Haggith; 3fifth, Shephatiah, by Abital; sixth, Ithream, by his wife Eglah. 4These six were born to David in Hebron; he reigned there seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years. 5These were born to David in Jerusalem: Shimea (Shammua), Shobab, Nathan, Solomon—four by Bath-shua (Bathsheba) daughter of Ammiel (Eliam); 6then Ibhar, Elishama (Elishua), Eliphelet (Elpelet), 7Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 8Elishama, Eliada (Beeliada), and Eliphelet—nine in all. 9All these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines; and Tamar was their sister.

10Solomon’s son was Rehoboam. Abijah was his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son, 11Joram (Jehoram) his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son, 12Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son, 13Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son, 14Amon his son, Josiah his son. 15The sons of Josiah: firstborn, Johanan; second, Jehoiakim (Eliakim); third, Zedekiah; fourth, Shallum (Jehoahaz). 16The sons (descendants) of Jehoiakim: Jehoiachin (Jeconiah) his son, Zedekiah his son. 17The sons (descendants) of Jehoiachin (Jeconiah) the prisoner: Shealtiel his son, 18Malchiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama and Nedabiah. 19The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and Shimei. The sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah, and Shelomith was their sister; 20and Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah, and Jushab-hesed—five in all. 21The sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah and Jeshaiah, the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shecaniah. 22The sons (descendants) of Shecaniah: Shemaiah. The sons of Shemaiah: Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat—six in all. 23The sons of Neariah: Elioenai, Hizkiah, and Azrikam—three in all. 24The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib, Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and Anani—seven in all.

1 Chronicles 4
Descendants Of Judah

1The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal. 2Reaiah the son of Shobal became the father of Jahath, and Jahath became the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These were the families of the Zorathites. 3These were the sons of Etam: Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash; and the name of their sister was Hazzelelponi. 4Penuel was the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These were the sons of Hur, the eldest of Ephrathah (Ephrath), the father of Bethlehem. 5Ashhur, the father of Tekoa, had two wives, Helah and Naarah. 6Naarah bore him Ahuzzam, Hepher, Temeni and Haahashtari. These were Naarah’s sons. 7The sons of Helah: Zereth, Izhar, and Ethnan. 8Koz fathered Anub, Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum. 9Jabez was more honorable than his brothers; but his mother named him Jabez, saying, “Because I gave birth to him in pain.” 10Jabez cried out to the God of Israel, saying, “Oh that You would indeed bless me and enlarge my border [property], and that Your hand would be with me, and You would keep me from evil so that it does not hurt me!” And God granted his request.

11Chelub the brother of Shuhah became the father of Mehir, the father of Eshton. 12Eshton became the father of Beth-rapha, Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These are the men of Recah.

13The sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah. The sons of Othniel: Hathath and Meonothai. 14Meonothai became the father of Ophrah, and Seraiah became the father of Joab the father of Ge-harashim [the Valley of Craftsmen, so named] because they were craftsmen. 15The sons of Caleb [Joshua’s companion] the son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam. The son of Elah: Kenaz. 16The sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel. 17The sons of Ezrah: Jether, Mered, Epher, and Jalon. These are the sons of Bithia daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took: she conceived and gave birth to Miriam, Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa. 18Mered’s Jewish wife gave birth to Jered the father of Gedor, Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. 19The sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were: the fathers of Keilah the Garmite and Eshtemoa the Maacathite. 20The sons of Shimon: Amnon, Rinnah, Benhanan, and Tilon. The sons of Ishi: Zoheth and Ben-zoheth. 21The sons of Shelah son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of the linen workers at Beth-ashbea; 22and Jokim, the men of Cozeba, Joash, and Saraph, who ruled in Moab, and Jashubi-lehem. These are ancient words (genealogical records). 23These were the potters and those who lived [among plantations and hedges] at Netaim and Gederah; they lived there with the king for his work.

Descendants of Simeon 24The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and Shaul; 25Shallum was Shaul’s son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son. 26The sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son. 27Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brothers did not have many sons, neither did all their family multiply like the sons of Judah. 28They lived at Beersheba, Moladah, Hazar-shual, 29Bilhah, Ezem, Tolad, 30Bethuel, Hormah, Ziklag, 31Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susim, Beth-biri, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities until the reign of David. 32These were their villages: Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, and Ashan—five cities— 33and all their villages that were around these towns as far as Baal. These were their settlements, and they have their genealogical record.

34Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah the son of Amaziah, 35Joel, Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel, 36also Elioenai, Jaakobah, Jeshohaiah, Asaiah, Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah, 37Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah; 38these mentioned by name were leaders in their families; and their fathers’ houses increased greatly [so they needed more land]. 39So they journeyed to the entrance of Gedor, to the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks. 40They found rich, good pasture, and the [cleared] land was wide, quiet, and peaceful; for those who had lived there previously came from Ham [and had left it a better place for those who came after them]. 41These, registered by name, came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and they attacked their tents and the Meunites (foreigners) who were found there, and utterly destroyed them to this day; and they settled in their place, because there was pasture there for their flocks. 42From them, from the sons of Simeon, five hundred men went to Mount Seir, with Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, as their leaders. 43They destroyed the remnant of the Amalekites who escaped, and they have lived there to this day (the date of this writing).

1 Chronicles 5
Descendants Of Reuben

1Now [we come to] the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel—for Reuben was the eldest, but because he defiled his father’s bed [with Bilhah his father’s concubine], his birthright was given to [Manasseh and Ephraim] the sons of Joseph [the favorite] son of Israel, so that he is not enrolled in the genealogy according to the birthright. 2Though Judah prevailed over his brothers, and from him came [David] the leader [and eventually the Messiah], yet the birthright was Joseph’s— 3the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 4The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, 5Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son, 6Beerah his son, whom Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria carried away into exile; he was a leader of the tribe of Reuben. 7And his brothers (relatives) by their families, in the genealogy of their generations, were the chief Jeiel, and Zechariah, 8Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who lived in Aroer as far as Nebo and Baal-meon. 9To the east Bela settled as far as the entrance into the desert from the river Euphrates, because their cattle had multiplied in the land of Gilead. 10In the days of King Saul they made war with the Hagrites, who fell by their hands; and they lived in their tents throughout all the land east of Gilead.

Descendants of Gad 11The sons of Gad lived opposite them in the land of Bashan, as far as Salecah: 12Joel was the chief, Shapham the second, then Janai and Shaphat in Bashan. 13Their relatives from the households of their fathers: Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber—seven in all. 14These were the sons of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz; 15Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, was chief in their fathers’ households. 16They lived in Gilead, in Bashan and in its towns, and in all the [surrounding] pasture lands of Sharon, as far as their borders. 17All these were enrolled in the genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah and in the days of Jeroboam [II] king of Israel.

18The sons of Reuben, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh—valiant men able to bear shield and sword, and to shoot with the bow, and skillful in war—were 44,760 who went to war. 19And these Israelites, [on the east side of the Jordan River] made war with the Hagrites [a tribe of northern Arabia], Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab. 20They were given help against them, and the Hagrites were handed over to them, and all who were allied with them; for they cried out to God [for help] in the battle; and He granted their entreaty because they relied on and trusted in Him. 21These Israelites took away their livestock: their 50,000 camels, and 250,000 sheep, and 2,000 donkeys; and 100,000 people. 22For a great number fell mortally wounded, because the battle was of God. And these Israelites settled in their territory until the exile [by Assyria more than five centuries later].

Descendants of Manasseh 23Now the sons (people) of the half-tribe of Manasseh lived in the land; their settlements spread from Bashan to Baal-hermon and Senir and Mount Hermon. 24These were the heads of their fathers’ households: Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, warriors of valor [willing and able to encounter danger], famous men, and heads of the households of their fathers.

25But they acted treacherously against the God of their fathers and played the prostitute with the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had destroyed before them. 26So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul, king of Assyria, [that is,] the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away into exile—the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh—and brought them to Halah, Habor, Hara, and the river Gozan, [where they remain] to this day.

1 Chronicles 6
Genealogy: The Priestly Line

1The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath and Merari. 2The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 3The sons of Amram: Aaron, Moses and Miriam. And the sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 4Eleazar became the father of Phinehas, Phinehas became the father of Abishua, 5and Abishua became the father of Bukki, and Bukki became the father of Uzzi, 6and Uzzi became the father of Zerahiah, and Zerahiah became the father of Meraioth, 7Meraioth became the father of Amariah, and Amariah became the father of Ahitub, 8and Ahitub became the father of Zadok, and Zadok became the father of Ahimaaz, 9and Ahimaaz became the father of Azariah, and Azariah became the father of Johanan, 10and Johanan became the father of Azariah (it was he who was priest in the house (temple) which Solomon built in Jerusalem) 11and Azariah became the father of Amariah, and Amariah became the father of Ahitub, 12and Ahitub became the father of Zadok, and Zadok became the father of Shallum, 13and Shallum became the father of Hilkiah, and Hilkiah became the father of Azariah, 14and Azariah became the father of Seraiah, and Seraiah became the father of Jehozadak; 15and Jehozadak went into captivity when the LORD sent [the people of] Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

16The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari. 17These are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei. 18The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. 19The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their fathers. 20Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son, 21Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son. 22The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son, 23Elkanah his son, Ebiasaph his son, Assir his son, 24Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son. 25The sons of Elkanah: Amasai and Ahimoth. 26As for Elkanah, the sons of Elkanah: Zophai his son and Nahath his son, 27Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah [Samuel’s father] his son. 28The sons of Samuel: Joel the firstborn and Abijah the second. 29The sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzza his son, 30Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.

31Now these are those whom David appointed over the service of song in the house of the LORD after the ark [of the covenant] rested there. 32They ministered with singing before the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting, until Solomon had built the LORD’S house (temple) in Jerusalem, performing their service in due order. 33These men and their sons served from the Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel [the great prophet and judge], 34the son of Elkanah [III], the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah, 35the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah [II], the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai, 36the son of Elkanah [I], the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah, 37the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, 38the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel (Jacob). 39Heman’s [tribal] brother Asaph stood at his right hand: Asaph the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea, 40the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah, 41the son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah, 42the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei, 43the son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi. 44Their relatives the sons of Merari stood at the left hand: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch, 45the son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah, 46the son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer, 47the son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi. 48Their relatives the Levites [who were not descended from Aaron] were appointed for all the other kinds of service of the tabernacle of the house of God.

Descendants of Aaron 49But [the line of] Aaron and his sons made offerings on the altar of burnt offering and on the altar of incense, ministering for all the work of the Holy of Holies (Most Holy Place), and [they did so] to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses, God’s servant, had commanded. 50These are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son, 51Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son, 52Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son, 53Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.

54Now these are their settlements according to their camps within their borders: to the sons of Aaron of the families of the Kohathites (for theirs was the first allocation by lot) 55to them they gave Hebron in the land of Judah and its surrounding pasture land; 56but the fields of the city and its villages they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh. 57To the sons of Aaron they gave the following cities of refuge: Hebron, Libnah with its pasture lands, Jattir, Eshtemoa with its pasture lands, 58Hilen with its pasture lands, Debir with its pasture lands, 59Ashan with its pasture lands, and Beth-shemesh with its pasture lands; 60and from the tribe of Benjamin: Geba, Alemeth, and Anathoth, with their pasture lands. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities.

61Then to the rest of the sons of Kohath were given ten cities by lot from the family of the tribe [of Ephraim and of Dan and], from the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh. 62To the sons of Gershom, according to their families, were given thirteen cities from the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and [the other half of] Manasseh in Bashan. 63To the sons of Merari were given twelve cities by lot, according to their families, from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun. 64So the sons of Israel gave to the Levites these cities with their pasture lands. 65They gave by lot from the tribes of the sons of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin these cities which are mentioned by name.

66Some of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their [allotted] territory from the tribe of Ephraim. 67They gave to the Levites the following cities of refuge: Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim with its pasture lands, Gezer with its pasture lands; 68Jokmeam and Beth-horon with their pasture lands, 69Aijalon and Gath-rimmon, with their pasture lands; 70and from the half-tribe of Manasseh [these cities], with their pasture lands: Aner and Bileam, for the rest of the families of the sons of Kohath.

71To the sons of Gershom were given from the family of the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan and Ashtaroth, with their pasture lands; 72from the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh and Daberath with their pasture lands, 73Ramoth and Anem with their pasture lands; 74from the tribe of Asher: Mashal and Abdon with their pasture lands, 75Hukok and Rehob with their pasture lands; 76and from the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee, Hammon, and Kiriathaim with their pasture lands.

77To the rest of the Levites, the sons of Merari were given, from the tribe of Zebulun: Rimmono and Tabor, with their pasture lands; 78and on the other side of the Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan the Levites were given, from the tribe of Reuben: Bezer in the wilderness and Jahzah with their pasture lands, 79Kedemoth and Mephaath with their pasture lands; 80from the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead and Mahanaim with their pasture lands, 81Heshbon and Jazer with their pasture lands.

1 Chronicles 7
Descendants Of Issachar

1The sons of Issachar were: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron—four in all. 2The sons of Tola: Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Ibsam, and Samuel, heads of their fathers’ households. The sons of Tola were courageous men in their generations; their number in the days of David was 22,600. 3The son of Uzzi: Izrahiah. The sons of Izrahiah: Michael, Obadiah, Joel, Isshiah; all five of them were chief men. 4With them by their generations according to their fathers’ households were 36,000 troops of the army for war, for they had many wives and children. 5Their relatives among all the families of Issachar, courageous men, registered by genealogies, were 87,000 in all.

Descendants of Benjamin 6The sons of Benjamin were three: Bela, Becher, and Jediael. 7The sons of Bela were five: Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth, and Iri. They were heads of the households of their fathers, courageous men. By their genealogies they were 22,034. 8The sons of Becher: Zemirah, Joash, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jeremoth, Abijah, Anathoth, and Alemeth, all these were sons of Becher. 9They were registered by their genealogies according to their generations, as heads of their fathers’ households, courageous men, 20,200 in number. 10The son of Jediael: Bilhan. The sons of Bilhan: Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud, Chenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish, and Ahishahar. 11All these were the sons of Jediael, according to the heads of their fathers’ households, 17,200 courageous men of valor, fit for military service. 12Shuppim and Huppim were the sons of Ir, and Hushim the son of Aher.

Sons of Naphtali 13The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.

Descendants of Manasseh 14The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, whom his Aramean concubine bore; she gave birth to Machir the father of Gilead. 15Machir took as a wife the sister of Huppim and Shuppim; her name was Maacah. The name of a second [descendant, the first being Gilead], was Zelophehad; and Zelophehad had [only] daughters. 16Maacah the wife of Machir gave birth to a son; she named him Peresh. The name of his brother was Sheresh; his sons were Ulam and Rakem. 17The son of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh. 18His sister Hammolecheth gave birth to Ishhod and Abiezer and Mahlah. 19The sons of Shemida were: Ahian, Shechem, Likhi, and Aniam.

Descendants of Ephraim 20The sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah and Bered his son, Tahath [I] his son, Eleadah his son, Tahath [II] his son, 21Zabad his son, Shuthelah his son, and Ezer and Elead were killed by men who were natives of Gath, because they came down to take their livestock. 22Their father Ephraim mourned for many days, and his relatives came to comfort him. 23Then he went in to his wife, and she conceived and gave birth to a son, and he named him Beriah (on misfortune), because tragedy had come on his house. 24Beriah’s daughter was Sheerah, who built both Lower and Upper Beth-horon, and also Uzzen-sheerah. 25Rephah was his son along with Resheph; Resheph’s son was Telah, Tahan his son, 26Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son, 27Non (Nun) his son, and Joshua [Moses’ successor] his son.

28Their possessions and settlements were Bethel and its towns, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, and Shechem, and as far as Ayyah with all their towns, 29and along the borders of the sons of Manasseh, Beth-shean, Taanach, Megiddo, Dor, with all their towns. In these [places] lived the sons of Joseph the son of Israel (Jacob).

Descendants of Asher 30The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, and Beriah; and Serah their sister. 31The sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith. 32Heber became the father of Japhlet, Shomer, Hotham, and Shua their sister. 33The sons of Japhlet: Pasach, Bimhal, and Ashvath. These were the sons of Japhlet. 34The sons of Shemer (Shomer) [his brother]: Ahi and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram. 35The sons of his brother Helem (Hotham): Zophah, Imna, Shelesh, and Amal. 36The sons of Zophah: Suah, Harnepher, Shual, Beri, Imrah, 37Bezer, Hod, Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran, and Beera. 38The sons of Jether: Jephunneh, Pispa, and Ara. 39The sons of Ulla: Arah, Hanniel, and Rizia. 40All these were sons (descendants) of Asher, heads of their fathers’ houses, choice men, courageous men, chiefs of the leaders. Their number, enrolled by genealogies for service in war, was 26,000 men.

1 Chronicles 8
Genealogy From Benjamin

1Benjamin became the father of Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, Aharah the third, 2Nohah the fourth and Rapha the fifth. 3Bela had sons: Addar, Gera, Abihud, 4Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, 5Gera, Shephuphan, and Huram. 6These are the sons of Ehud: These are the heads of the fathers’ households of the inhabitants of Geba; they were exiled to Manahath: 7Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera—he forced them into exile; he became the father of Uzza and Ahihud. 8Shaharaim became the father of children in the country of Moab after he had sent away (divorced) Hushim and Baara his wives. 9By Hodesh his wife he became the father of Jobab, Zibia, Mesha, Malcam, 10Jeuz, Sachia, and Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of fathers’ households. 11By Hushim he became the father of Abitub and Elpaal. 12The sons of Elpaal: Eber, Misham, and Shemed, who built Ono and Lod, with its towns; 13and Beriah and Shema, who were heads of fathers’ households of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove out the inhabitants of Gath; 14and Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth. 15Zebadiah, Arad, Eder, 16Michael, Ishpah, and Joha were the sons of Beriah. 17Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber, 18Ishmerai, Izliah, and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal. 19Jakim, Zichri, Zabdi, 20Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel, 21Adaiah, Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei. 22Ishpan, Eber, Eliel, 23Abdon, Zichri, Hanan, 24Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah, 25Iphdeiah and Penuel were the sons of Shashak. 26Shamsherai, Shehariah, Athaliah, 27Jaareshiah, Elijah, and Zichri were the sons of Jeroham. 28These [men] were heads of the fathers’ households, according to their generations, chief men who lived in Jerusalem.

29Now in Gibeon, Jeiel, the father of Gibeon lived, and his wife’s name was Maacah; 30and his firstborn son was Abdon, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Nadab, 31Gedor, Ahio, and Zecher. 32Mikloth became the father of Shimeah. They also lived with their relatives in Jerusalem opposite their other relatives. Genealogy from King Saul 33Ner became the father of Kish, and Kish became the father of [King] Saul, and Saul became the father of Jonathan, Malchi-shua, Abinadab and Eshbaal (Ish-bosheth). 34The son of Jonathan was Merib-baal (Mephibosheth), and Merib-baal became the father of Micah. 35The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and Ahaz. 36Ahaz became the father of Jehoaddah, and Jehoaddah became the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri became the father of Moza. 37Moza became the father of Binea; Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son. 38Azel had six sons, and these were their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel. 39The sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the third. 40The sons of Ulam were courageous men, archers, and had many sons and grandsons—150 in all. All these were of the sons (descendants) of Benjamin.

1 Chronicles 9
People Of Jerusalem

1So all Israel was enrolled by genealogies; and they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel. And Judah was carried away into exile to Babylon because of their unfaithfulness [to God].

2Now the first [of the returned exiles] who lived [again] in their possessions in their cities were Israel, the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim (temple servants). 3Some of the sons (people) of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh lived in Jerusalem: 4Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the sons of Perez the son of Judah. 5From the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn and his sons. 6From the sons of Zerah: Jeuel and their relatives, 690 [of them]. 7From the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah; 8Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah; 9and their relatives according to their generations, 956. All these men were heads of fathers’ households according to their fathers’ houses.

10Of the priests: Jedaiah, Jehoiarib, Jachin, 11Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the chief officer of the house of God; 12and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah; Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer; 13and their relatives, heads of their fathers’ households, 1,760—very able men for the work of the service of the house of God.

14Of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari; 15and Bakbakkar, Heresh, Galal, and Mattaniah son of Mica, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph; 16and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who lived in the villages of the Netophathites [near Jerusalem].

17The gatekeepers were: Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman, and their relatives (Shallum the chief 18who until now was assigned to the king’s gate on the east side) they were the gatekeepers for the camp of the Levites. 19Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his relatives of his father’s house, the Korahites, were in charge of the work of the service, doorkeepers of the Tent; and their fathers had been in charge of the camp of the LORD, keepers of the entrance. 20Phinehas the son of Eleazar was ruler over them in times past, and the LORD was with him. 21Zechariah son of Meshelemiah was gatekeeper at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. 22All those chosen to be gatekeepers at the thresholds were 212. They were enrolled by their genealogies in their villages [around Jerusalem], these men [whose grandfathers] David and Samuel the seer had appointed to their official duty. 23So they and their sons were in charge of the gates of the house of the LORD, that is, the house of the tabernacle, as guards. 24The gatekeepers were stationed on the four sides —on the east, west, north, and south. 25Their relatives in their villages were to come in every seven days from time to time to be with them; 26for these Levites, the four chief gatekeepers, had an official duty, and were in charge of the chambers and treasuries of the house of God. 27They spent the night around the house of God, for the [night] watch was theirs, and they were in charge of opening the house morning after morning.

28Now some of them were in charge of the serving utensils, being required to count them when they brought them in or took them out. 29Some of them also were appointed over the furniture and over all the [sacred] utensils of the sanctuary, as well as over the fine flour and the wine and the [olive] oil and the frankincense and the spices. 30Other sons of the priests prepared the mixture of spices. 31Mattithiah, one of the Levites, the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, was responsible for the things baked in pans. 32Some of their Kohathite relatives were in charge of the showbread to prepare it every Sabbath.

33Now these are the singers, heads of the fathers’ households of the Levites, living in the temple chambers, free from other service because they were on duty day and night. 34These were heads of fathers’ households of the Levites according to their generations, chief men, who lived in Jerusalem.

Ancestry and Descendants of Saul 35Jeiel the father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon, and his wife’s name was Maacah, 36and his firstborn son was Abdon, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab, 37Gedor, Ahio, Zechariah, and Mikloth. 38Mikloth became the father of Shimeam. They also lived with their relatives in Jerusalem, opposite their other relatives. 39Ner became the father of Kish, and Kish became the father of [King] Saul, and Saul became the father of Jonathan, Malchi-shua, Abinadab, and Esh-baal. 40The son of Jonathan was Merib-baal (Mephibosheth); Merib-baal became the father of Micah. 41The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tahrea [and Ahaz]. 42Ahaz became the father of Jarah, and Jarah became the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri became the father of Moza, 43Moza became the father of Binea and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son. 44Azel had six sons, and these are their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. These were the sons of Azel.
1 Chronicles 10
Defeat And Death Of Saul And His Sons

1Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from them and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. 2The Philistines followed closely after Saul and his sons and overtook them, and the Philistines killed Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul. 3The battle became heavy against Saul, and the archers found him; and he was [mortally] wounded by the archers. 4Then Saul said to his armor bearer, “Draw your sword and run me through with it, otherwise these uncircumcised [Philistines] will come and abuse and humiliate me.” But his armor bearer would not, for he was terrified. So Saul took his own sword and fell on it. 5When his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell on his sword and died. 6So Saul died with his three sons and all those of his house died together.

7When all the men of Israel who were in the valley saw that the army had fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned their cities and fled; and the Philistines came and lived in them.

8It came about the next day, when the Philistines came to strip (plunder) the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 9So they stripped Saul and took his head and his armor and sent messengers around the land of the Philistines to bring the good news to their idols and to the people. 10They put Saul’s armor in the house of their gods and nailed up his head in the house (temple) of Dagon. Jabesh-gilead’s Tribute to Saul 11When all Jabesh-gilead heard about everything that the Philistines had done to Saul, 12all the brave men arose, took away the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons and brought them to Jabesh, and they buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh; then they fasted seven days.

13So Saul died for his trespass which he committed against the LORD, for his failure to keep the word of the LORD; and also because he consulted a medium [regarding a spirit of the dead], to inquire of her, 14and did not inquire of the LORD [instead]. Therefore the LORD killed him and turned the kingdom over to David the son of Jesse.
1 Chronicles 11
David Made King Over All Israel

1Then all Israel gathered to David at Hebron, saying, “Behold, we are your bone and your flesh. 2“In times past, even when Saul was king, it was you who led out and brought in Israel; and the LORD your God said to you, ‘You shall shepherd My people Israel, and you shall be prince and leader over My people Israel.’” 3So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and David made a covenant (solemn agreement) with them there before the LORD; and they anointed him king over Israel, in accordance with the word of the LORD through Samuel.

Jerusalem, Capital City 4Then David and all Israel went to Jerusalem (that is Jebus); and the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, were there. 5Then the Jebusites said to David, “You shall not come in here.” But David captured the stronghold of Zion (that is, the City of David). 6Now David said, “Whoever strikes down a Jebusite first shall be chief and commander.” Joab the son of Zeruiah [David’s half sister] went up first, and so he was made chief. 7Then David lived in the stronghold; so it was called the City of David. 8He built the city around it, from the Millo (fortification) to the surrounding area; and Joab repaired the rest of the [old Jebusite] city. 9David became greater and greater, for the LORD of hosts was with him.

David’s Mighty Men 10Now these are the chiefs of David’s mighty men, who strongly supported him in his kingdom, together with all Israel, to make him king, in accordance with the word of the LORD concerning Israel. 11This is the list of David’s mighty men: Jashobeam, the son of a Hachmonite, the chief of the thirty [heroes]. He lifted up his spear against three hundred whom he killed at one time.

12Next to him [in rank] was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, who was one of the three mighty men. 13He was with David at Pasdammim [where David had killed Goliath] and there the Philistines were gathered together for battle, and there was a plot of ground full of barley; and the people [of Israel] fled before the Philistines. 14But they took their stand in the midst of that plot and defended it, and killed the Philistines; and the LORD rescued them by a great victory.

15Three of the thirty chief men went down to the rock to David, into the cave of Adullam, while the army of the Philistines was camped in the Valley of Rephaim. 16David was then in the stronghold, while the garrison of the Philistines was in Bethlehem. 17David had a craving and said, “Oh that someone would give me a drink of water from the well of Bethlehem, which is next to the gate!” 18Then the three [mighty men] broke through the camp of the Philistines and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem which was next to the gate, and brought it to David. But David would not drink it; he poured it out to the LORD [as an offering]; 19and he said, “Far be it from me before my God that I would do this thing! Shall I drink the blood of these men who have put their lives in jeopardy? For they brought it at the risk of their lives.” So he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.

20Abishai the brother of Joab was chief of the [other] three, and he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them, and he had a name as well as the three. 21Of the three in the second [rank] he was the most honored and became their captain; however, he did not attain to the first three [Jashobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah].

22Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a courageous man of Kabzeel who had done great things, killed the two sons of Ariel of Moab. Also he went down and killed a lion in a pit on a snowy day. 23He killed an Egyptian also, a man of great stature, five cubits tall. In the Egyptian’s hand was a spear like a weaver’s beam, and Benaiah went down to him with [only] a staff (rod) and grabbed the spear from the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear. 24Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did these things, and had a name as well as the three mighty men. 25He was honored among the thirty, but he did not attain to [the rank of] the [first] three. David appointed him over his bodyguard.

26Now the mighty men of the armies were: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem, 27Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite, 28Ira the son of Ikkesh of Tekoa, Abiezer of Anathoth, 29Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite, 30Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite, 31Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the Benjamites, Benaiah the Pirathonite, 32Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite, 33Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite, 34the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shagee the Hararite, 35Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur, 36Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite, 37Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai, 38Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Hagri, 39Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armor bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah [David’s half sister], 40Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, 41Uriah the Hittite [Bathsheba’s husband], Zabad the son of Ahlai, 42Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites, and thirty [heroes] with him, 43Hanan the son of Maacah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite, 44Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite, 45Jediael the son of Shimri, and his brother Joha, the Tizite, 46Eliel the Mahavite, Jeribai and Joshaviah the sons of Elnaam, Ithmah the Moabite, 47Eliel and Obed and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.

1 Chronicles 12
David’s Supporters In Ziklag

1These are the ones who came to David at Ziklag, while he still concealed himself from Saul the son of Kish; they were among the courageous men who helped him in battle. 2They were armed with bows, and could use the right hand or the left to sling stones and shoot arrows from the bow; they were Saul’s relatives from [the tribe of] Benjamin. 3The chief was Ahiezer and then Joash, the sons of Shemaah of Gibeah; Jeziel and Pelet the sons of Azmaveth; Beracah, and Jehu of Anathoth, 4Ishmaiah of Gibeon, a mighty man among the thirty, and [a leader] over them; Jeremiah, Jahaziel, Johanan, Jozabad of Gederah, 5Eluzai, Jerimoth, Bealiah, Shemariah, Shephatiah the Haruphite, 6Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites, 7and Joelah and Zebadiah the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.

8Courageous men from the Gadites came over to David in the stronghold in the wilderness, men trained for war, who could handle shield and spear, whose faces were like the faces of lions, and who were swift as gazelles on the mountains. 9Ezer was the first, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third, 10Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, 11Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh, 12Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth, 13Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh. 14These from the sons (descendants) of Gad were captains of the army; he who was least was equal to a hundred, and the greatest was equal to a thousand. 15These are the men who crossed over the Jordan in the first month when it had overflowed all its banks and they put to flight all those in the valleys, east and west.

16Then some of the men of Benjamin and Judah came to the stronghold to David. 17David went out to meet them and said to them, “If you have come peacefully to me to help me, my heart shall be united with you; but if you have come to betray me to my adversaries, since there is no violence or wrong in my hands, may the God of our fathers look on [what you are doing] and punish [you].” 18Then the [Holy] Spirit came on Amasai, who was chief of the thirty, and he said,
“We are yours, O David,
And with you, O son of Jesse!
Peace, peace be to you,
And peace be to him who helps you;
For your God helps you.”
Then David accepted and received them and made them officers of his troops.

19Some [of the men] of Manasseh also defected to David when he came with the Philistines to go to battle against Saul. But David’s men did not [actually] assist the Philistines, for the lords (governors) of the Philistines after consultation sent him away, saying, “At the cost of our heads he may defect to his master Saul.” 20As David went to Ziklag, these men defected to him from Manasseh: Adnah, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, captains of thousands who belonged to Manasseh. 21They helped David against the band of raiders, for they were all courageous men, and [all seven] became commanders in his army. 22For day by day men kept coming to David to help him, until there was a great army, like the army of God.

Supporters Gathered at Hebron 23These are the numbers of the [armed] units equipped for war who came to David at Hebron to turn [over] the kingdom of Saul to him, in accordance with the word of the LORD. 24Those of the tribe of Judah who carried shield and spear were 6,800, armed for war; 25of the tribe of Simeon, brave warriors, 7,100; 26of the tribe of Levi, 4,600. 27Jehoiada was the leader of [the house of] Aaron, and with him were 3,700, 28and Zadok, a courageous young man, and twenty-two captains from his father’s house. 29Of the tribe of Benjamin, the relatives of [King] Saul, 3,000; for until now the majority of them had kept their allegiance to the house of Saul. 30Of the tribe of Ephraim, 20,800, courageous men, famous in their fathers’ houses. 31Of the half-tribe of Manasseh, 18,000, who were designated by name to come and make David king. 32Of the tribe of Issachar, men who understood the times, with knowledge of what Israel should do, two hundred chiefs; and all their relatives were at their command; 33of the tribe of Zebulun, there were 50,000 in military service who could draw up in battle formation with all kinds of weapons of war and helped David, men with an undivided heart. 34Of the tribe of Naphtali, there were 1,000 captains, and with them 37,000 [of the rank and file armed] with shield and spear. 35Of the tribe of Dan, 28,600 men who could draw up in battle formation. 36Of the tribe of Asher, 40,000 men in military service, able to draw up in battle formation. 37From the other side [east] of the Jordan River, of [the tribes of] Reuben and Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, 120,000 men, armed with all kinds of weapons of war for the battle.

38All these, being men of war arrayed in battle formation, came to Hebron with a perfect (committed) heart to make David king over all Israel; and all the rest of Israel were also of one mind to make David king. 39They were there with David for three days, eating and drinking, for their relatives had prepared for them. 40Also those who were [living] near them [from] as far as [the tribes of] Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali, brought food on donkeys, camels, mules, and oxen, abundant supplies of flour, cakes of figs and raisins, wine, [olive] oil, oxen, and sheep, for there was joy in Israel.

1 Chronicles 13
Peril In Transporting The Ark

1David consulted with the captains of the thousands and the hundreds, even with every leader. 2David said to all the assembly of Israel, “If it seems good to you, and if it is from the LORD our God, let us send word everywhere to our fellow countrymen who remain in all the land of Israel, and to the priests and Levites who are with them in their cities with pasture lands, so that they may meet with us; 3and let us bring back the ark of our God to us, for we did not seek it during the days of Saul.” 4Then all the assembly agreed to do so, for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.

5So David gathered all Israel together, from the Shihor [watercourse] of Egypt, to the entrance of Hamath [in the north], to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim. 6David and all Israel went up to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, which belongs to Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God the LORD who sits enthroned above the cherubim, the ark which is called by His name. 7They carried the ark of God on a new cart and brought it out of the house of Abinadab, and Uzza and Ahio [his brother] drove the cart. 8David and all Israel celebrated [joyfully] before God with all their might, with songs, lyres, harps, tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets.

9When they came to the threshing floor of Chidon, Uzza put out his hand to hold and steady the ark, for the oxen [that were drawing the cart] nearly overturned it. 10The anger of the LORD burned against Uzza, and He struck him down because he touched the ark; and there he died before God. 11David became angry because of the LORD’S outburst against Uzza; so that place is called Perez-uzza to this day. 12David was afraid of God that day, and he said, “How can I bring the ark of God home with me?” 13So David did not bring the ark with him to the City of David, but took it aside to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 14So the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house three months; and the LORD blessed the house of Obed-edom and all that he had.

1 Chronicles 14
David’s Family Enlarged

1Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David with cedar timbers, masons and carpenters, to build a house (palace) for him. 2And David understood that the LORD had established and confirmed him as king over Israel, for his kingdom was highly exalted for the sake of His people Israel.

3Then David took more wives at Jerusalem, and he became the father of more sons and daughters. 4Now these are the names of the children born [to him] in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon, 5Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet, 6Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia, 7Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.

Philistines Defeated 8When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over all Israel, they all went up in search of David; and he heard about it and went out against them. 9Now the Philistines had come and made a raid in the Valley of Rephaim. 10So David inquired of God, “Shall I go up against the Philistines? And will You hand them over to me?” Then the LORD said to him, “Go up, and I will hand them over to you.” 11So Israel came up to Baal-perazim, and David defeated the Philistines there. Then David said, “God has broken through my enemies by my hand, like the breakthrough of waters.” Therefore they named that place Baal-perazim. 12The Philistines abandoned their gods (idols) there; so David gave a command and they were burned in a fire [as the Law of Moses required].

13The Philistines again made a raid in the valley. 14So David inquired again of God, and God said to him, “Do not go up after them; circle around behind them and come at them in front of the balsam trees. 15“It shall be when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, then you shall go out to battle, for God has gone out before you to strike the Philistine army.” 16So David did just as God had commanded him, and they struck down the army of the Philistines from Gibeon as far as Gezer. 17Then David’s fame spread into all the lands; and the LORD caused all nations to fear him.

1 Chronicles 15
Plans To Move The Ark To Jerusalem

1David built houses for himself in the City of David; and he prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it. 2Then David said, “No one is to carry the ark of God except the Levites; for the LORD chose them to carry the ark of God and to minister to Him forever.” 3And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the LORD to the place which he had prepared for it. 4David gathered together the sons of Aaron and the Levites: 5of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief, with 120 of his relatives; 6of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the chief, with 220 of his relatives; 7of the sons of Gershom, Joel the chief, with 130 of his relatives; 8of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief, with 200 of his relatives; 9of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief, with 80 of his relatives; 10of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief, with 112 of his relatives.

11Then David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites—Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab, 12and he said to them, “You are the heads of the fathers’ households of the Levites; consecrate yourselves, both you and your relatives, so that you may bring up the ark of the LORD God of Israel, to the place that I have prepared for it. 13“Because you did not [carry it as God directed] the first time, the LORD our God made an [angry] outburst against us, for we did not seek Him in accordance with the ordinance.” 14So the priests and the Levites consecrated (dedicated) themselves to bring up the ark of the LORD God of Israel. 15The Levites carried the ark of God on their shoulders with the poles, as Moses commanded in accordance with the word of the LORD.

16Then David told the chiefs of the Levites to appoint their relatives as the singers, with instruments of music—harps, lyres, and cymbals—to play loudly and to raise sounds of joy [with their voices]. 17So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel, and from his relatives, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and from the sons of Merari their relatives, Ethan the son of Kushaiah, 18and with them their relatives of the second rank: Zechariah, Ben, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, and Mikneiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the gatekeepers. 19So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan were appointed to sound aloud the bronze cymbals; 20and Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah [were to play] with harps tuned to Alamoth [that is, a high pitch]; 21and Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-edom, Jeiel, and Azaziah were to lead with lyres set to Sheminith [that is, the eighth string, a low pitch]. 22Chenaniah, leader of the Levites, was in charge of the singing; he gave instruction in singing because he was skilled. 23Berechiah and Elkanah were gatekeepers for the ark. 24Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer the priests blew the trumpets before the ark of God. Obed-edom and Jehiah (Jeiel) were also gatekeepers for the ark.

25So David, with the elders of Israel and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from the house of Obed-edom with joy. 26Because God was helping the Levites who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD [to do it carefully and safely], they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams. 27David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, as were all the Levites who carried the ark, and the singers and Chenaniah, director of the music of the singers. David also wore an ephod (a priestly upper garment) of linen. 28Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the horn, with trumpets, with loud-sounding cymbals, with harps and lyres.

29It happened that as the ark of the covenant of the LORD came to the City of David, Michal [David’s wife] the daughter of Saul, looking down through a window, saw King David leaping and dancing [in celebration]; and she despised him in her heart.

1 Chronicles 16
A Tent For The Ark

1So they brought the ark of God and set it inside the tent which David had pitched for it, and they offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before God. 2When David had finished offering the burnt offerings and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD. 3He distributed to everyone in Israel, both man and woman, to everyone a loaf of bread, a portion of meat, and a raisin cake.

4He appointed some of the Levites to minister before the ark of the LORD and to profess [God’s name] and to thank and praise the LORD, the God of Israel: 5Asaph the chief, and second to him Zechariah, then Jeiel (Jaaziel), Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel with musical instruments, harps and lyres; also Asaph played loud-sounding cymbals; 6and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests blew trumpets continually before the ark of the covenant of God.

7Then on that day David first entrusted to Asaph and his relatives to give thanks to the LORD [as their chief task]. Psalm of Thanksgiving
😯 give thanks to the LORD, call on His name;
Make His deeds known among the peoples.
9Sing to Him, sing praises to Him;
Speak of all His wonders.
10Glory in His holy name;
Let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
11Seek the LORD and His strength;
Seek His face continually [longing to be in His presence].
12Remember [with gratitude] His marvelous deeds which He has done,
His miracles and the judgments from His mouth,
13O seed of Israel His servant,
Children of Jacob, His chosen ones!
14He is the LORD our God;
His judgments are in all the earth.
15Be mindful of His covenant forever,
The promise which He commanded and established to a thousand generations,
16The covenant which He made with Abraham,
And His oath (sworn promise) to Isaac.
17He confirmed it as a statute to Jacob,
And to Israel as an everlasting covenant,
18Saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaan,
As the portion of your possession and inheritance.”
19When you were few in number,
Even a very few, and strangers in it,
20When they wandered from nation to nation,
And from one kingdom to another people,
21He allowed no man to oppress or exploit them,
And, He reproved and punished kings for their sakes, saying,
22“Do not touch My anointed ones,
And do My prophets no harm.”
23Sing to the LORD, all the earth;
Proclaim the good news of His salvation from day to day.
24Declare His glory among the nations,
His marvelous works among all peoples.
25For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised;
He is also to be feared [with awe-filled reverence] above all gods.
26For all the gods of the peoples are [lifeless] idols,
But the LORD made the heavens.
27Splendor and majesty are [found] in His presence;
Strength and joy are [found] in His place (sanctuary).
28Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the peoples,
Ascribe to the LORD glory and honor and strength.
29Ascribe to the LORD the glory and honor due His name;
Bring an offering [of thanksgiving], and come before Him;
Worship the LORD in the splendor of holiness.
30Tremble [reverently] before Him, all the earth;
The world is firmly established, it will not be moved.
31Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice;
And let them say among the nations, “The LORD reigns.”
32Let the sea roar, and all the things that fill it;
Let the field rejoice, and all that is in it.
33Then the trees of the forest will sing for joy before the LORD;
For He comes to judge and govern the earth.
34O give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
For His lovingkindness endures forever.
35Then say, “Save us, O God of our salvation;
Gather us together and rescue us from the nations,
That we may give thanks to Your holy name,
And glory in Your praise.”
36Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
Forever and ever.
And all the people said, “Amen,” and praised the LORD.

Worship before the Ark 37So David left Asaph and his relatives there before the ark of the covenant of the LORD to minister before the ark continually, as each day’s work required; 38and Obed-edom with his sixty-eight relatives; also Obed-edom the son of Jeduthun, and Hosah, were to be gatekeepers. 39David left Zadok the priest and his relatives the priests before the dwelling place (tabernacle) of the LORD in the high place which was at Gibeon, 40to offer burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of burnt offering continually, morning and evening, in accordance with all that is written in the Law of the LORD, which He commanded Israel. 41With them were Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest who were chosen and designated by name, to give thanks to the LORD, for His lovingkindness endures forever. 42With them were Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those who were to sound aloud, and instruments for [accompanying] the songs of God. And the sons of Jeduthun were to be at the gate.

43Then all the people departed, each to his house, and David returned [home] to bless his household.

1 Chronicles 17
God’s Covenant With David

1As David sat in his house (palace), he said to Nathan the prophet, “Behold, I live in a house of cedars, while the ark of the covenant of the LORD is under tent curtains.” 2Then Nathan said to David, “Do all that is in your heart, for God is with you.”

3But it came about that same night that the word of God came to Nathan, saying, 4“Go and tell David My servant, ‘Thus says the LORD, “You shall not build a house for Me to dwell in; 5for I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought Israel up [from Egypt] until this day, but I have gone from tent to tent and from one dwelling place to another. 6“Wherever I have walked with all Israel, did I say a word to any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to shepherd My people, saying, ‘Why have you not built for Me a house of cedar?’”’ 7Now, therefore, this is what you shall say to My servant David: ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts, I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, to be leader over My people Israel. 8I have been with you wherever you have gone, and I have cut off all your enemies from before you; and I will make your name like the name of the great ones of the earth. 9I will appoint a place for My people Israel, and will plant them, so that they may live in their own place and not be moved again [nor tremble with fear]; and the wicked will not waste (persecute) them anymore, as formerly, 10since the time that I commanded judges to be over My people Israel. And I will humble and subdue all your enemies.

“Furthermore, I tell you that the LORD will build you a house (a blessed posterity). 11And it shall come to pass that when your days are completed and you must go to be with your fathers [in death], I will raise up one of your descendants after you, one of your own sons; and I will establish his kingdom. 12He shall build Me a house, and I will establish his throne forever. 13I will be his father and he shall be My son; and I will not take My steadfast love and mercy away from him, as I took it from him (King Saul) who was before you. 14“But I will settle him in My house and in My kingdom forever, and his throne shall be established forevermore.”’” 15According to all these words and according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.

David’s Prayer in Response 16Then David the king went in and sat before the LORD and said, “Who am I, O LORD God, and what is my house and family that You have brought me this far? 17This was a small thing in Your eyes, O God; but You have spoken of Your servant’s house for a great while to come, and have regarded me according to the standard and estate of a man of high degree (prominence), O LORD God. 18What more can David say to You for the honor granted to Your servant? For You know Your servant. 19O LORD, for Your servant’s sake, and in accordance with Your own heart, You have accomplished all this greatness, to make known all these great things. 20O LORD, there is no one like You, nor is there any God except You, according to all that we have heard with our ears. 21And what one nation on the earth is like Your people Israel, whom God went to redeem for Himself as a people, to make a name for Yourself by great and awesome and terrible things, by driving out nations from before Your people, whom You redeemed out of Egypt? 22You made Your people Israel Your own people forever, and You, LORD, became their God.

23“Therefore now, O LORD, let the word which You have spoken concerning Your servant and his house endure forever, and do as You have said. 24Let Your name [and the character that it denotes] endure and be magnified forever, saying, ‘The LORD of hosts is the God of Israel, yes, a God to Israel; and the house of Your servant David is established before You.’ 25For You, O my God, have revealed to Your servant that You will build for him a house (descendants); therefore Your servant has found courage to pray before You. 26And now, O LORD, You are God, and you have spoken and promised this good thing to Your servant. 27“Therefore may it please You to bless the house (descendants) of Your servant, that it may continue before You forever; for what You bless, O LORD, is blessed forever.”

1 Chronicles 18
David’s Kingdom Strengthened

1After this it came about that David defeated and subdued the Philistines, and he took Gath and its villages out of the hand of the Philistines. 2He defeated Moab, and the Moabites became David’s servants and brought tribute (gifts).

3David also defeated Hadadezer king of Zobah as far as Hamath, as he went to establish his dominion to the Euphrates River. 4David took from him 1,000 chariots, 7,000 horsemen, and 20,000 foot soldiers (infantrymen). David also hamstrung [nearly] all the chariot horses [to make them lame and useless], but left enough of them for 100 chariots.

5When the Arameans (Syrians) of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king of Zobah, David killed 22,000 of the Arameans. 6Then David put military outposts among the Arameans in Damascus; and the Arameans became David’s servants and brought tribute. Thus the LORD helped David wherever he went. 7David took the shields of gold which were carried by the servants of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem. 8Likewise from Tibhath and from Cun, cities of Hadadezer, David brought a very large amount of bronze, with which Solomon later made the bronze Sea (large basin), the pillars, and the utensils of bronze.

9When Tou king of Hamath heard how David had defeated all the army of Hadadezer king of Zobah, 10he sent Hadoram his son to King David to greet him and to bless (congratulate) him, because he had fought against Hadadezer and had defeated him; for Hadadezer had been at war with Tou. And Hadoram brought all kinds of articles of gold and silver and bronze. 11King David also dedicated these to the LORD [setting them apart for sacred use], with the silver and the gold which he brought from all the nations: from Edom, Moab, the Ammonites, the Philistines, and from Amalek.

12Also Abishai the son of Zeruiah [David’s half sister] defeated 18,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt. 13He put military outposts in Edom, and all the Edomites became David’s servants. Thus the LORD helped David wherever he went.

14So David reigned over all Israel and administered justice and righteousness for all his people. 15Joab the son of Zeruiah was in command of the army, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder; 16Zadok the son of Ahitub and Abimelech the son of Abiathar were the priests, and Shavsha was secretary (state scribe); 17and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was in charge of the Cherethites and the Pelethites [David’s bodyguards], and the sons of David were chiefs at the king’s side.

1 Chronicles 19
David’s Messengers Abused

1Now it came about after this, that Nahash king of the Ammonites died, and his son became king in his place. 2David said, “I will be kind (gracious) to Hanun son of Nahash, because his father was kind to me.” So David sent messengers to comfort him concerning [the death of] his father. And the servants of David came to the land of the Ammonites to comfort Hanun. 3But the leaders of the Ammonites said to Hanun, “Do you think that David has sent people to console and comfort you because he honors your father? Have his servants not come to you to search and to overthrow and to spy out the land?” 4Therefore Hanun took David’s servants, shaved them [cutting off half their beards], and cut off their garments in the middle as far as their buttocks, and sent them away [in humiliation]. 5When David was told how the men were treated, he sent messengers to meet them, for they were very humiliated and ashamed [to return]. So the king said, “Stay in Jericho until your beards grow [back], and then return.”

6When the Ammonites saw that they had made themselves hateful to David, Hanun and his people sent 1,000 talents of silver to hire for themselves chariots and horsemen from Mesopotamia, Aram-maacah, and Zobah. 7So they hired for themselves 32,000 chariots and the king of Maacah and his troops, who came and camped before Medeba. And the Ammonites gathered together from their cities and came to battle. 8When David heard about it, he sent Joab and all the army of courageous men. 9The Ammonites came out and lined up in battle formation at the entrance of the city [Medeba], while the kings who had come were by themselves in the open country.

Ammon and Aram Defeated 10Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him in the front and in the rear, he chose warriors from all the choice men of Israel and put them in formation against the Arameans (Syrians). 11The rest of the soldiers he placed in the hand of Abishai his brother, and they lined up against the Ammonites. 12He said, “If the Arameans are too strong for me, then you shall help me; but if the Ammonites are too strong for you, I will help you. 13“Be strong and let us show ourselves courageous for the sake of our people and for the cities of our God; and may the LORD do what is good in His sight.” 14So Joab and the people who were with him approached the Arameans for battle, and they fled before him. 15When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans fled, they also fled before Abishai, Joab’s brother, and entered the city [Medeba]. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.

16When the Arameans (Syrians) saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they sent messengers and brought out the Arameans who were beyond the [Euphrates] River, with Shophach the commander of the army of Hadadezer leading them. 17When this was told to David, he gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan, and came upon them and drew up in formation against them. So when David drew up in battle array against the Arameans, they fought against him. 18But the Arameans fled before Israel, and David killed of the Arameans 7,000 charioteers and 40,000 foot soldiers, and put to death Shophach the commander of the army. 19When the servants of Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they made peace with David and became subject to and served him. And the Arameans (Syrians) were not willing to help the Ammonites anymore.

1 Chronicles 20
War With Philistine Giants

1Then it happened at the end of the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, Joab led out the army and ravaged and devastated the land of the Ammonites, and came and besieged Rabbah. But David stayed at Jerusalem [with Bathsheba]. Joab struck Rabbah and overthrew it. 2David took the crown of their king from his head and found that it weighed a talent of gold and that there was a precious stone in it; so it was set on David’s head. He also brought a very great amount of spoil (plunder) out of the city [of Rabbah]. 3He brought out the people who were in it, and put them [to work] with saws, iron picks, and axes. David dealt in this way with all the Ammonite cities. Then David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.

4Now it came about after this that war broke out at Gezer with the Philistines; then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai, one of the descendants of the giants, and they were subdued. 5There was war again with the Philistines, and Elhanan the son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam. 6Again there was war at Gath, where there was a man of great stature who had twenty-four fingers and toes, six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot; and he also was descended from the giants. 7When he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea, David’s brother, killed him. 8These were descended from the giants in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.

1 Chronicles 21
Census Brings Pestilence

1Satan [the adversary] stood up against Israel and incited David to count [the population of] Israel. 2So David said to Joab and the leaders of the people, “Go, count Israel from Beersheba to Dan, and bring me their total, so that I may know it.” 3Joab said, “May the LORD add to His people a hundred times as many as they are! But, my lord the king, are they not all my lord’s servants? Why then does my lord require this? Why will he bring guilt on Israel?” 4But the king’s word prevailed over Joab. So Joab left and went throughout all Israel and came to Jerusalem. 5Then Joab gave the total of the census of the people to David. And all Israel were 1,100,000 men who drew the sword; and in Judah 470,000 men who drew the sword. 6But he did not count Levi and Benjamin among them, because the king’s order was detestable to Joab.

7Now God was displeased with this act [of arrogance and pride], and He struck Israel. 8Then David said to God, “I have sinned greatly because I have done this thing. But now, I beseech You, take away the wickedness and guilt of Your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.”

9And the LORD said to Gad, David’s seer, 10“Go and tell David, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD, “I offer you three choices; choose for yourself one of them, which I will do to you [as punishment for your sin].”’” 11So Gad came to David and said to him, “Thus says the LORD: ‘Choose for yourself 12either three years of famine, or three months to be swept away before your enemies, while the sword of your enemies overtakes you, or else three days of the sword of the LORD and plague in the land, and the angel of the LORD bringing destruction throughout all the territory of Israel.’ Now therefore, consider what answer I shall return to Him who sent me.” 13David said to Gad, “I am in great distress; please let me fall into the hands of the LORD, for His mercies are very great; but do not let me fall into the hand of man.”

14So the LORD sent a plague on Israel, and 70,000 men of Israel fell. 15God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it; and as he was destroying it, the LORD looked, and relented concerning the catastrophe and said to the destroying angel, “It is enough; now remove your hand [of judgment].” And the angel of the LORD was standing by the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. 16Then David raised his eyes and saw the angel of the LORD standing between earth and heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, covered in sackcloth, fell on their faces. 17David said to God, “Is it not I who commanded the people to be counted? I am the one who has sinned and done evil; but as for these sheep [the people of Israel], what have they done? O LORD my God, please let Your hand be against me and my father’s house, but not against Your people that they should be plagued.”

David’s Altar 18Then the angel of the LORD commanded Gad to say to David, that David should go up and build an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. 19So David went up at Gad’s word, which he spoke in the name of the LORD. 20Now Ornan was threshing wheat, and he turned back and saw the angel; and his four sons who were with him hid themselves. 21As David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw him, and went out from the threshing floor and bowed down before David with his face to the ground. 22Then David said to Ornan, “Give me the site of this threshing floor, so that I may build an altar on it to the LORD. You shall charge me the full price for it, so that the plague may be averted from the people.” 23Ornan said to David, “Take it for yourself; and let my lord the king do what is good in his eyes. See, I will give you the oxen also for burnt offerings and the threshing sledges (heavy wooden platforms) for wood and the wheat for the grain offering; I give it all.” 24But King David said to Ornan, “No, I will certainly pay the full price; for I will not take what is yours for the LORD, nor offer a burnt offering which costs me nothing.” 25So David gave Ornan 600 shekels of gold by weight for the site. 26Then David built an altar to the LORD there and presented burnt offerings and peace offerings. And he called on the LORD, and He answered him with fire from heaven on the altar of burnt offering. 27Then the LORD commanded the [avenging] angel, and he put his sword back into its sheath.

28At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered him on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, he sacrificed there. 29For the tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of burnt offering were at that time in the high place at Gibeon. 30But David could not go before it to inquire of God, for he was terrified by the sword of the angel of the LORD.

1 Chronicles 22
David Prepares For Temple Building

1Then David said, “This is the house of the LORD God, and this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel.”

2So David gave orders to gather the foreigners who were in the land of Israel, and he assigned stonecutters to hew out stones to build the house of God. 3David prepared large quantities of iron to make nails for the doors of the gates and for the clamps (trusses), and more bronze than could be weighed; 4and cedar trees beyond number, for the Sidonians and Tyrians brought large quantities of cedar timber to David. 5David said, “Solomon my son is young and inexperienced, and the house that is to be built for the LORD shall be exceedingly magnificent, famous, and an object of glory and splendor throughout all lands [of the earth]. So now I will make preparations for it.” Therefore, David made ample preparations before his death.

Solomon Charged with the Task 6Then he called for Solomon his son and ordered him to build a house for the LORD, the God of Israel. 7David said to Solomon, “My son, I had intended to build a house for the Name (Presence) of the LORD my God. 8But the word of the LORD came to me, saying, ‘You have shed much blood and have waged great wars; you shall not build a house for My Name, because you have shed so much blood on the earth before me. 9‘Behold, a son will be born to you, who will be a man of peace. I will give him rest from all his enemies on every side; for his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quiet to Israel in his days. 10‘He shall build a house for My Name (Presence). He shall be My son and I will be his father; and I will establish his royal throne over Israel forever.’ 11Now, my son, may the LORD be with you so that you may be successful and build the house of the LORD your God, just as He has spoken concerning you. 12Only may the LORD give you wisdom and understanding, and give you charge over Israel, so that you may keep the law of the LORD your God. 13Then you will prosper, if you are careful to observe and fulfill the statutes and ordinances which the LORD commanded Moses concerning Israel. Be strong and courageous, do not fear nor be dismayed. 14Now listen, with great trouble I have prepared and provided for the house of the LORD 100,000 talents of gold, 1,000,000 talents of silver, and bronze and iron beyond weighing, for they are great in quantity. I have also prepared and provided timber and stone, and you may add to them. 15Further, you have workmen in abundance: stonecutters and stonemasons and carpenters, and all men who are skillful in every kind of work. 16“As for the gold, the silver, the bronze, and the iron, there is no limit. So arise and begin working, and may the LORD be with you.”

17David also commanded all the leaders of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying, 18“Is not the LORD your God with you? And has He not given you rest and peace on every side? For He has given the inhabitants of the land into my hand, and the land is subdued before the LORD and before His people. 19“Now set your heart and your soul to seek (inquire of, require as your vital necessity) the LORD your God. Arise and build the sanctuary of the LORD God, so that you may bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD and the holy articles and utensils of God into the house built for the Name (Presence) of the LORD.”

1 Chronicles 23
Solomon Reigns

1When David reached old age, he made his son Solomon king over Israel. 2And he assembled together all the leaders of Israel with the priests and Levites. Offices of the Levites 3The Levites thirty years old and upward were counted, and their number man by man was 38,000. 4Of these 24,000 were to oversee and inspect the work of the house of the LORD and 6,000 were to be administrators and judges, 5and 4,000 were gatekeepers, and 4,000 [musicians] were to praise the LORD with the instruments which David made for giving praise. 6And David organized them into divisions according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

Gershonites 7Of the Gershonites: Ladan (Libni) and Shimei. 8The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the first and Zetham and Joel—three in all. 9The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran—three in all. These were the heads of the fathers’ households of Ladan. 10The sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina (Zizah), Jeush, and Beriah. These were the four sons of Shimei. 11Jahath was the first and Zizah the second; but Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons [not enough for a father’s house or clan], so they were [counted together] as one father’s household, one working group.

Kohathites 12The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel—four in all. 13The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. Aaron was set apart to consecrate him as most holy, he and his sons forever, to burn incense before the LORD, attend to His service, and to bless [worshipers] in His name forever. 14But as for Moses the man of God, his sons were counted among the tribe of Levi. 15The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer. 16The son of Gershom: Shebuel the chief. 17The son of Eliezer was Rehabiah the chief. Eliezer had no other sons, but Rehabiah’s sons were very many [in number]. 18The son of Izhar: Shelomith the chief. 19The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. 20The sons of Uzziel: Micah the first and Isshiah the second.

Merarites 21The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish. 22Eleazar died and had no sons, but daughters only, and their relatives, the sons of Kish, took them as wives. 23The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jeremoth—three in all.

Duties Revised 24These were the Levites by their fathers’ households, the heads of the fathers’ households of those registered, according to the number of names of the individuals who were the servants of the house of the LORD, from twenty years old and upward. 25For David said, “The LORD God of Israel, has given peace and rest to His people, and He dwells in Jerusalem forever. 26“Also, the Levites will no longer need to carry the tabernacle and all its utensils for its service.” 27For by the last words of David, the Levites from twenty years old and above were counted. 28For their duty is to assist [the priests] the sons of Aaron in the service of the house of the LORD, in [caring for] the courtyards, the chambers, the purifying of all holy things, and any work of the service of the house of God, 29and with the showbread, and the fine flour for a grain offering, and unleavened wafers, or what is baked in the pan or what is well-mixed, and all measures of volume and size [as the Law of Moses required]. 30They are to stand every morning to thank and praise the LORD, and likewise at evening, 31and to offer all burnt sacrifices to the LORD on the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the festivals by number according to the ordinance concerning them, continually before the LORD. 32So they shall be responsible for the Tent of Meeting, the Holy Place, and the sons of Aaron their relatives, for the service of the house of the LORD.

1 Chronicles 24
Divisions Of Levites

1The divisions of the descendants of Aaron were these: the sons of Aaron were Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 2But Nadab and Abihu died before their father and had no sons; therefore Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests. 3David, with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, divided them according to their offices for their assigned duties. 4Since there were more chief men found among the descendants of Eleazar than among the descendants of Ithamar [because of Eli’s misfortunes, and Saul’s massacre of the priests at Nob], they were divided in this way: sixteen heads of fathers’ households of the descendants of Eleazar and eight of the descendants of Ithamar, corresponding to their fathers’ households. 5So they were divided by lot, one group with the other; for they were officers of the sanctuary and officers (high priests) of God, both from the descendants of Eleazar and from the descendants of Ithamar. 6Shemaiah, the son of Nethanel the scribe, from the Levites, recorded them in the presence of the king, the officers, Zadok the priest, Ahimelech the son of Abiathar [the priest who escaped Saul’s massacre at Nob], and the heads of the fathers’ households of the priests and of the Levites; one father’s household taken for Eleazar and one taken for Ithamar.

7The lots fell, the first one to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah, 8the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim, 9the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin, 10the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah, 11the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah, 12the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim, 13the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab, 14the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer, 15the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez, 16the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel, 17the twenty-first to Jachin, the twenty-second to Gamul, 18the twenty-third to Delaiah, the twenty-fourth to Maaziah. 19These were their offices and positions for their service in the house of the LORD according to the ordinance given to them by their father (ancestor) Aaron, just as the LORD God of Israel had commanded him.

20Now as for the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram: Shubael; of the sons of Shubael: Jehdeiah. 21Of Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah: Isshiah the first. 22Of the Izharites: Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath. 23The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth. 24Of the sons of Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir. 25The brother of Micah, Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah. 26The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; the sons of Jaaziah, Beno. 27The sons of Merari: by Jaaziah were Beno, Shoham, Zaccur, and Ibri. 28By Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons. 29By Kish: the sons of Kish, Jerahmeel. 30The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites according to their fathers’ households. 31These also cast lots as did their relatives the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, Zadok, Ahimelech, and the heads of the fathers’ households of the priests and of the Levites—the head of father’s households as well as those of his younger brother.

1 Chronicles 25
Number And Services Of Musicians

1Moreover, David and the commanders of the army selected for the [temple] service some of the sons of Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun, who were to prophesy with lyres, harps, and cymbals. The list of the musicians who performed their service was as follows: 2Of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah, and Asharelah; the sons of Asaph were under the direction of Asaph, who prophesied under the direction of the king. 3Of Jeduthun, the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Shimei, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the direction of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with the lyre in thanksgiving and praise to the LORD. 4Of Heman, the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth. 5All these [men] were the sons of Heman the king’s seer to exalt him in accordance with the words of God; for God gave Heman fourteen sons and three daughters. 6All these were under the direction of their father to sing in the house of the LORD, with cymbals, harps, and lyres, for the service of the house of God. Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman were under the order and direction of the king. 7So their number [who led the remainder of the 4,000], with their relatives who were trained in singing to the LORD, all who were skillful, was 288. Divisions of Musicians 8The musicians cast lots for their duties, everyone alike, the small (younger) as well as the great (older), the teacher as well as the student.

9The first lot for Asaph fell to Joseph; the second to Gedaliah, to him, his relatives and his sons, twelve; 10the third to Zaccur, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 11the fourth to Izri, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 12the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 13the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 14the seventh to Jesharelah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 15the eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 16the ninth to Mattaniah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 17the tenth to Shimei, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 18the eleventh to Azarel, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 19the twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 20the thirteenth to Shubael, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 21the fourteenth to Mattithiah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 22the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 23the sixteenth to Hananiah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 24the seventeenth of Joshbekashah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 25the eighteenth to Hanani, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 26the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 27the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 28the twenty-first to Hothir, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 29the twenty-second to Giddalti, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 30the twenty-third to Mahazioth, his sons and his relatives, twelve; 31the twenty-fourth to Romamti-ezer, his sons and his relatives, twelve.

1 Chronicles 26
Divisions Of The Gatekeepers

1For the divisions of the gatekeepers: Of the Korahites: Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph. 2Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth, 3Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh. 4Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, Sacar the fourth, Nethanel the fifth, 5Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth; for God had blessed him. 6Also to his son Shemaiah sons were born who ruled over the house of their father, for they were courageous men of ability. 7The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, Rephael, Obed, and Elzabad, whose brothers were courageous and able men, Elihu and Semachiah. 8All these were sons of Obed-edom [in whose house the ark was kept], they and their sons and relatives, strong and able men for the service—sixty-two from Obed-edom. 9Meshelemiah had sons and relatives, eighteen courageous men. 10Also Hosah, one of the sons of Merari, had sons: Shimri the first and chief (although he was not the firstborn, his father made him first), 11Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth; the sons and relatives of Hosah were thirteen in all.

12To these divisions of the gatekeepers, the chief men, were given duties, like their relatives, to minister in the house of the LORD. 13They cast lots, the small (younger) and great (older) alike, in accordance with their fathers’ households, for every gate. 14The lot for the east [gates] fell to Shelemiah. They cast lots also for his son Zechariah, a wise counselor, and his lot came out for the north [gates]. 15To Obed-edom [it came out] for the south [gates], and the storehouse was allotted to his sons. 16To Shuppim and Hosah [the lot fell] for the west [gates], by the gate of Shallecheth, on the ascending highway, division by division. 17On the east were six Levites, on the north four a day, on the south four a day, and two by two at the storehouse. 18At the colonnade on the west side [of the outer court of the temple] there were four at the road and two at the colonnade. 19These were the divisions of the gatekeepers among the Korahites and the sons of Merari.

Keepers of the Treasure 20Of the Levites, Ahijah was in charge of the treasuries of the house of God and the treasuries of the dedicated gifts. 21The sons of Ladan, the sons of the Gershonites belonging to Ladan, namely, the Jehielites, were the heads of the fathers’ households, belonging to Ladan the Gershonite.

22The sons of Jehieli, Zetham and his brother Joel, were in charge of the treasuries of the house of the LORD. 23Of the Amramites, Izharites, Hebronites, and Uzzielites: 24Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was supervisor over the treasuries. 25His relatives by Eliezer were his son Rehabiah, his son Jeshaiah, his son Joram, his son Zichri, and his son Shelomoth. 26This Shelomoth and his relatives were in charge of all the treasuries of the dedicated gifts which King David, the heads of the fathers’ households, the commanders of thousands and hundreds, and the commanders of the army, had dedicated. 27From spoil won in battles they dedicated gifts to maintain and repair the house of the LORD. 28Also all that Samuel the seer had dedicated, and Saul the son of Kish, Abner the son of Ner and Joab the son of Zeruiah, everyone who had dedicated anything, this was in the care of Shelomoth and his relatives.

Outside Duties 29Of the Izharites: Chenaniah and his sons were appointed to outside duties for Israel, as administrators and judges. 30Of the Hebronites: Hashabiah and his relatives, 1,700 capable men, were in charge of the affairs of Israel west of the Jordan, for all the work of the LORD and the service of the king. 31Of the Hebronites: Jerijah was the chief (these Hebronites were examined according to their descendants and fathers’ households in the fortieth [and final] year of David’s reign, and men of courage and ability were found among them at Jazer in Gilead) 32and Jerijah’s relatives, 2,700 capable men, were heads of fathers’ households; and King David made them overseers of the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, for everything pertaining to God and to the king.

1 Chronicles 27
Commanders Of The Army

1This is the list of the sons (descendants) of Israel, the heads of fathers’ households, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and their officers who served the king in all matters of the divisions which came in and went out month by month throughout the year, each division numbering 24,000:

2Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel was in charge of the first division for the first month; and in his division were 24,000. 3He was descended from Perez, and was chief of all the commanders of the army for the first month. 4Dodai the Ahohite and his division was in charge of the division for the second month, Mikloth was the chief officer; and in his division were 24,000. 5The third commander of the army for the third month was Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada the priest, as chief; and in his division were 24,000. 6This is the Benaiah who was the mighty man of the thirty and was in charge of the thirty; and Ammizabad his son was over his division. 7The fourth, for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him; and in his division were 24,000. 8The fifth, for the fifth month was the commander Shamhuth the Izrahite; and in his division were 24,000. 9The sixth, for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite; and in his division were 24,000. 10The seventh, for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite of the sons of Ephraim; and in his division were 24,000. 11The eighth, for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite of the Zerahites; and in his division were 24,000. 12The ninth, for the ninth month was Abiezer of Anathoth, a Benjamite; and in his division were 24,000. 13The tenth, for the tenth month was Maharai from Netophah of the Zerahites; and in his division were 24,000. 14The eleventh, for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite of the sons of Ephraim; and in his division were 24,000. 15The twelfth, for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite of Othniel; and in his division were 24,000.

Chief Officers of the Tribes 16Now in charge of the tribes of Israel [were the following]: chief officer of the Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri; of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maacah; 17of Levi, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok; 18of Judah, Elihu, one of David’s brothers; of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael; 19of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jeremoth the son of Azriel; 20of the Ephraimites, Hoshea the son of Azaziah; of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah; 21of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner; 22of Dan, Azarel the son of Jeroham. These were the leaders of the tribes of Israel. 23But David did not count those twenty years of age and under, for the LORD had said he would multiply Israel as the stars of heaven. 24Joab the son of Zeruiah began a census but did not finish; and because of this, [God’s] wrath came on Israel, and the number was not recorded in the chronicles of King David.

Various Overseers 25Azmaveth the son of Adiel was in charge of the king’s storerooms; and Jonathan the son of Uzziah was in charge of the storehouses in the country, in the cities, in the villages, and in the towers. 26Ezri the son of Chelub was in charge of those who did the work of the field, tilling the soil. 27Shimei the Ramathite was in charge of the vineyards; Zabdi the Shiphmite was in charge of the produce of the vineyards for the wine cellars. 28Baal-hanan the Gederite was in charge of the olive and sycamore trees in Shephelah (the lowlands); and Joash was in charge of the stores of [olive] oil. 29Shitrai the Sharonite was in charge of the cattle grazing in Sharon; Shaphat the son of Adlai was in charge of the cattle in the valleys. 30Obil the Ishmaelite was in charge of the camels; and Jehdeiah the Meronothite was in charge of the donkeys. 31Jaziz the Hagrite was in charge of the flocks. All these were overseers and stewards of the property which belonged to King David.

Counselors 32Also Jonathan, David’s uncle, was a counselor and advisor, a man of understanding and wisdom, and a scribe; and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni attended (tutored) the king’s sons. 33Ahithophel was counselor to the king; and Hushai the Archite was the king’s companion and friend. 34Ahithophel was succeeded by Jehoiada the son of Benaiah and by Abiathar; and Joab was the commander of the king’s army.

1 Chronicles 28
David’s Address About The Temple

1David assembled at Jerusalem all the leaders (officials) of Israel, the leaders of the tribes, and the commanders of the divisions that served the king, and the commanders of thousands, and the commanders of hundreds, and the overseers of all the property and livestock of the king and his sons, with the palace officers and the mighty men, and all the brave warriors. 2Then David the king rose to his feet and said, “Hear me, my brothers [in arms] and my people. I had intended to build a permanent home for the ark of the covenant of the LORD and as a footstool for our God, and I prepared materials for the building. 3But God said to me, ‘You shall not build a house for My Name (Presence), because you are a man of war and have shed blood.’ 4However, the LORD, the God of Israel, chose me from all in my father’s house to be king over Israel forever. For He has chosen Judah to be the leader; and in the house (tribe) of Judah he chose the house of my father; and among the sons of my father He was pleased to make me king over all Israel. 5Of all my sons (for the LORD has given me many sons) He has chosen my son Solomon to sit on the throne of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel. 6He said to me, ‘Solomon your son shall build My house and My courts; for I have chosen him to be a son to Me, and I will be a father to him. 7‘I will establish his kingdom forever if he loyally and continually obeys My commandments and My ordinances, as is done today.’ 8Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the assembly of the LORD, and in the hearing of our God, observe and seek after all the commandments of the LORD your God so that you may possess the good land and leave it as an inheritance to your sons after you forever.

9“As for you, Solomon my son, know the God of your father [have personal knowledge of Him, be acquainted with, and understand Him; appreciate, heed, and cherish Him] and serve Him with a blameless heart and a willing mind; for the LORD searches all hearts and minds, and understands every intent and inclination of the thoughts. If you seek Him [inquiring for and of Him and requiring Him as your first and vital necessity] He will let you find Him; but if you abandon (turn away from) Him, He will reject you forever. 10“Consider this carefully, for the LORD has chosen you to build a house for the sanctuary. Be courageous and strong and do it.”

11Then David gave to his son Solomon the plan for the porch of the temple, its buildings, its treasuries, its upper chambers, its inner rooms, and for the place for the [ark and its] mercy seat; 12and the plan of all that he had in mind, for the courts of the house of the LORD, and for all the surrounding rooms, for the storerooms of the house of God and for the storerooms for the dedicated gifts and offerings; 13the plan for the divisions of the priests and the Levites and for all the work of the service in the house of the LORD and for all the utensils for service in the house of the LORD; 14for the golden utensils, the weight of gold and silver for all the gold and silver articles for every kind of service; 15and the weight of gold for the golden lampstands and their golden lamps, with the weight of each lampstand and its lamps; and the weight of silver for the silver lampstands, with the weight of each lampstand and its lamps according to the use of each lampstand; 16the gold by weight for each table of showbread, and the silver for the tables of silver; 17and the forks, the basins, and the pitchers of pure gold; and for the golden bowls with the weight for each bowl; and for the silver bowls with the weight for each bowl; 18and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the model of the chariot of the cherubim that spread their wings and covered the ark of the LORD’S covenant.

19“All this,” said David, “the LORD made me understand in writing by His hand upon me, all the work and details [to be done] according to this plan.”

20Then David said to his son Solomon, “Be strong and courageous, and take action; do not fear nor be dismayed, for the LORD God, my God, is with you. He will not fail you nor abandon you [but will guide you in the construction] until you have finished all the work for the service of the house of the LORD. 21“And see, [you have] the divisions of the priests and Levites for all the service of God’s house, and every willing, skillful man will be with you in all the kinds of work for any kind of service. Also the officers and all the people will be entirely at your command.”

1 Chronicles 29
Offerings For The Temple

1And King David said to all the assembly, “My son Solomon, whom alone God has chosen, is still young and inexperienced and the work is great; for the temple is not for man but for the LORD God. 2So with all my ability I have provided for the house of my God the gold for the things of gold, silver for the things of silver, bronze for the things of bronze, iron for the things of iron, and wood for the things of wood, as well as onyx stones and stones to be inlaid, stones of antimony (a brittle, silvery-white metal) and stones of various colors, and all kinds of precious stones and alabaster in abundance. 3Moreover, because I delight in the house of my God, the [personal] treasure that I have of gold and silver, I give to the house of my God, in addition to all that I have already provided for the holy house: 4namely, 3,000 talents of gold from the gold of Ophir, and 7,000 talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the buildings; 5gold for the things of gold, silver for the things of silver, that is, for all the work to be done by craftsmen. Now who is willing to consecrate himself today to the LORD?”

6Then the rulers of the fathers’ households, and leaders of the tribes of Israel, and the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, with the overseers of the king’s work, offered willingly 7and gave for the service of the house of God: 5,000 talents and 10,000 darics of gold, and 10,000 talents of silver, and 18,000 talents of bronze, and 100,000 talents of iron. 8Whoever had precious stones gave them to the treasury of the house of the LORD, in the care of Jehiel the Gershonite. 9Then the people rejoiced because they had given willingly, for with a whole and blameless heart they had offered freely to the LORD. King David also rejoiced greatly.

David’s Prayer 10Therefore David blessed the LORD in the sight of all the assembly and said, “Blessed (praised, adored, and thanked) are You, O LORD God of Israel (Jacob) our father, forever and ever. 11Yours, O LORD, is the greatness and the power and the glory and the victory and the majesty, indeed everything that is in the heavens and on the earth; Yours is the dominion and kingdom, O LORD, and You exalt Yourself as head over all. 12Both riches and honor come from You, and You rule over all. In Your hand is power and might; and it is in Your hands to make great and to give strength to everyone. 13Now therefore, our God, we thank You, and praise Your glorious name.

14“But who am I, and who are my people, that we should be able to offer as generously as this? For all things come from You, and from Your own hand we have given to You. 15For we are sojourners before You, and tenants, as all our fathers were; our days on the earth are like a shadow, and there is no hope [of remaining]. 16O LORD our God, all this abundance that we have prepared to build You a house for Your holy Name, it is from Your hand, and is all Your own. 17I know also, my God, that You test the heart and delight in uprightness and integrity. In the uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered all these things. So now with joy I have seen Your people who are present here, make their offerings willingly and freely to You. 18O LORD, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our fathers, keep forever such purposes and thoughts in the minds of Your people, and direct their hearts toward You; 19and give to my son Solomon a perfect heart to keep Your commandments, Your testimonies, and Your statutes, and to do all [that is necessary] to build the temple [for You], for which I have made provision.”

20Then David said to all the assembly, “Now bless (praise, thank) the LORD your God.” And all the assembly blessed the LORD, the God of their fathers, and bowed down and honored the LORD and to the king [as His earthly representative]. Sacrifices 21The next day they offered sacrifices and burnt offerings to the LORD: 1,000 bulls, 1,000 rams, and 1,000 lambs, with their drink offerings (libations) and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel. 22They ate and drank that day before the LORD with great rejoicing.

Solomon Again Made King 23> They made Solomon the son of David king a second time, and anointed him as ruler for the LORD and Zadok as [high] priest. 24Then Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king in place of David his father; and he prospered, and all Israel obeyed him. 25All of the leaders and warriors, and also all the sons of King David, pledged allegiance to King Solomon. 26The LORD highly exalted Solomon in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed on him royal majesty which had not been on any king before him in Israel.

27Thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel. 28The time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; he reigned seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem. Death of David 29He died in a good old age [his seventy-first year], full of days (satisfied), riches and honor. Solomon his son reigned in his place. 30Now the acts of King David, from first to last, are written in the chronicles (records) of Samuel the seer, in the chronicles of Nathan the prophet, and in the chronicles of Gad the seer, 31with [accounts of] all his reign, and his power, and the times and circumstances which came on him, on Israel, and on all the kingdoms of the [surrounding] lands.

2 Chronicles 1
Solomon Worships At Gibeon

1Solomon the son of David established himself securely over his kingdom, and the LORD his God was with him and made him exceedingly great.

2Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the commanders of thousands and of hundreds and to the judges and to every leader in all Israel, the heads of the fathers’ (ancestors’) households. 3Then Solomon and all the assembly went to the high place at Gibeon [to offer sacrifices, where the Canaanites had habitually worshiped], for God’s Tent of Meeting was there, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in the wilderness. 4But David had brought up the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim to the place he had prepared for it, because he had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem. 5Now the bronze altar, which Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made was there before the tabernacle of the LORD, and Solomon and the assembly sought it out. 6And Solomon went up to the bronze altar before the LORD at the Tent of Meeting, and offered a thousand burnt offerings on it.

7That night God appeared to Solomon and said to him, “Ask what I shall give to you.” Solomon’s Prayer for Wisdom 8Then Solomon said to God, “You have shown great lovingkindness and mercy to my father David, and have made me king in his place. 9Now, O LORD God, Your promise to my father David is fulfilled, for You have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth. 10“Give me wisdom and knowledge, so that I may go out and come in [performing my duties] before this people, for [otherwise] who can rule and administer justice to this great people of Yours?” 11God replied to Solomon, “Because this was in your heart and you did not ask for riches, possessions or honor and personal glory, or the life of those who hate you, nor have you even asked for long life, but you have asked for wisdom and knowledge for yourself so that you may rule and administer justice to My people over whom I have made you king, 12wisdom and knowledge have been granted you. I will also give you riches, possessions, and honor, such as none of the kings who were before you has possessed nor will those who will come after you.” 13So Solomon went from the high place at Gibeon, from the Tent of Meeting, to Jerusalem. And he reigned over Israel.

Solomon’s Wealth 14Solomon acquired chariots and horsemen; he had 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horsemen, and he stationed them in the cities [suited for the use] of chariots and with the king at Jerusalem. 15The king made silver and gold as plentiful and common in Jerusalem as stones, and he made cedar as plentiful as the sycamore-fig trees in the lowland. 16Solomon’s horses were imported from Egypt and from Kue. The king’s merchants purchased them [in large numbers] from Kue at a price. 17And they imported chariots from Egypt for 600 shekels of silver apiece, and horses for 150 apiece; and in the same way they exported horses to all the kings of the Hittites and the kings of the Arameans (Syrians).

2 Chronicles 2
Solomon Will Build A Temple And Palace

1Now Solomon decided to build a house (temple) for the Name of the LORD, and a royal palace for himself. 2So Solomon assigned 70,000 men to carry loads, 80,000 men to quarry stone in the mountains, and 3,600 to supervise them.

3Then Solomon sent word to Hiram king of Tyre, saying, “As you dealt with my father David and sent him cedars to build himself a house in which to live, [please] do the same for me. 4Observe, I am about to build a house for the Name of the LORD my God, dedicated to Him, to burn fragrant incense [of sweet spices] before Him, to set out the showbread continually, and to offer burnt offerings morning and evening, on Sabbaths, New Moons, and on the festivals of the LORD our God, as ordained forever in Israel. 5The house I am going to build will be great, for our God is greater than all the gods. 6But who is able to build a house for Him, since the heavens and [even] the highest heavens cannot contain Him? Who am I to build a house for Him, except [as a place] to burn incense before Him? 7Now send me a man who is skilled to work in gold, silver, bronze, and iron, and in purple, crimson, and blue fabrics, and who knows how to make engravings, to work with the skilled men who are with me in Judah and Jerusalem, whom my father David provided. 8Send me also cedar, cypress, and algum timber, for I know that your servants know how to cut timber in Lebanon. And indeed my servants will work with your servants 9to prepare for me an abundance of timber, because the house I am about to build will be great and wonderful. 10“And I will give to your servants who cut timber, 20,000 measures of crushed wheat and 20,000 measures of barley, and 20,000 baths of wine and 20,000 baths of [olive] oil.”

Hiram to Assist 11Then Hiram, king of Tyre replied in a letter sent to Solomon: “Because the LORD loves His people, He has made you king over them.” 12Hiram said also, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who made heaven and earth, who has given King David a wise son, endowed with discretion and understanding, who will build a house for the LORD and a royal palace for himself.

13“Now I am sending a skilled man, endowed with understanding, Huram-abi, 14the son of a Danite woman and a Tyrian father. He is trained to work in gold, silver, bronze, iron, stone, and wood; in purple, blue, and crimson fabrics, and in fine linen. He is able to make any kind of engraving and to carry out any design given him. He will work with your skilled men and those of my lord, David your father. 15Now then, let my lord send to his servants the wheat, the barley, the oil, and the wine of which he has spoken. 16“We will cut whatever timber you need from Lebanon and bring it to you on rafts by sea to Joppa, so that you may take it up to Jerusalem.”

17Then Solomon took a count of all the aliens in the land of Israel, like the census that his father David had taken; and they were found to be 153,600. 18He assigned 70,000 of them to carry loads and 80,000 to quarry stone in the mountain, and 3,600 as overseers to make the people work.

2 Chronicles 3
The Temple Construction In Jerusalem

1Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where the LORD appeared to his father David, in the place that David had prepared, on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. 2Solomon began to build on the second day of the second month in the fourth year of his reign. Dimensions and Materials of the Temple 3Now this is the [measurement of the] foundation which Solomon laid for the house of God: the length in cubits—by the old standard of measure—was sixty cubits (90 ft.), and the width was twenty cubits (30 ft.). 4The porch in front of the house was as long as the width of the house, twenty cubits, and the height was 120 cubits. He overlaid it inside with pure gold. 5He overlaid the main room [the Holy Place] with cypress wood and overlaid it with fine gold, and decorated it with palm trees and chains. 6And he adorned the house with precious stones; and the gold was gold from Parvaim. 7He also overlaid the house [the Holy Place] with gold—the beams, the thresholds, and its walls and its doors; and he carved cherubim on the walls.

8Now he made the room of the Holy of Holies: its length equaling the width of the house was twenty cubits, and its width was twenty cubits; and he overlaid it with 600 talents of fine gold. 9The weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. He also overlaid the upper rooms with gold.

10And in the Holy of Holies he made two sculptured cherubim, and overlaid them with gold. 11The wingspan of the cherubim was twenty cubits: one wing of one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house, and its other wing, of five cubits, touched the other cherub’s wing. 12The wing of the other cherub, of five cubits, touched the wall of the house; and its other wing of five cubits touched the wing of the first cherub. 13The wings of these cherubim extended twenty cubits. The cherubim stood on their feet, their faces toward the Holy Place (the main room). 14He made the veil [between the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies] of blue, purple, and crimson colors, and fine linen, and embroidered cherubim on it.

15He also made two pillars for the front of the house, thirty-five cubits high, and the capital on the top of each one was five cubits. 16He made chains [like a necklace] in the inner sanctuary and put them on the tops of the pillars; and he made a hundred pomegranates and put them on the chains. 17He erected the pillars in front of the temple, one on the right, the other on the left, and named the one on the right Jachin (may He establish) and the one on the left Boaz (in Him is strength).

2 Chronicles 4
Furnishings Of The Temple

1Then Solomon made an altar of bronze, twenty cubits in length, twenty cubits in width, and ten cubits in height. 2He also made the Sea [that is, the large basin used for ceremonial washing] of cast metal, ten cubits from brim to brim, circular in form, and five cubits in height, and its circumference was thirty cubits. 3Under it and entirely encircling it were figures of oxen, ten to a cubit. The oxen were in two rows, cast in one piece. 4It stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing west, three facing south, three facing east; and the Sea was set on top of them and all their hindquarters turned inward. 5It was a handbreadth (the width of the four fingers) thick; its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It could hold 3,000 baths (measures). 6He also made ten [portable] basins in which to wash, and he put five on the right (south) side and five on the left (north). They would rinse things for the burnt offering in them, but the Sea was for the priests to wash in.

7And he made ten golden lampstands just as directed and set them in the temple, five on the right side and five on the left. 8He made also ten tables and placed them in the temple, five on the right side and five on the left side, and he made a hundred [ceremonial] basins of gold. 9Moreover, he made the courtyard of the priests, and the great courtyard [for the people] and doors for the courtyard, and he overlaid their doors with bronze. 10He set the Sea on the right side at the southeast corner [of the house].

11And Huram also made the pails [for ashes], the shovels, and the basins. So Huram finished the work that he did for King Solomon in the house of God: 12the two pillars, the bowls, the capitals on top of the two pillars, and the two lattice works to cover the two bowls of the capitals which were on top of the pillars, 13and the four hundred pomegranates for the two lattice works, two rows of pomegranates for each lattice to cover the two bowls of the capitals on the pillars. 14He also made the stands and he made the basins on the stands; 15and the one Sea with the twelve oxen under it. 16The pails, the shovels, and the meat-forks, and all the utensils Huram-abi made of polished bronze for King Solomon for the house of the LORD. 17The king cast them on the plain of the Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredah. 18Solomon made all these utensils in such great quantity that the weight of the bronze could not be determined.

19Solomon also made all the articles that were in the house of God: the golden altar, and the tables for the bread of the Presence (showbread), 20and the lampstands with their lamps of pure gold, to burn in front of the inner sanctuary (the Holy of Holies) as directed; 21the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs of gold, of purest gold; 22and the snuffers, the basins, the dishes [for incense], and the firepans, of pure gold; and for the entrance of the house (temple), the inner doors for the Holy of Holies and the doors of the Holy Place (main room), were of gold.

2 Chronicles 5
The Ark Is Brought Into The Temple

1Thus all the work that Solomon did for the house of the LORD was finished. He brought in the things that his father David had dedicated, and he put the silver and the gold and all the utensils in the treasuries of the house of God.

2Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the tribes, the leaders of the fathers’ households of the Israelites, in Jerusalem to bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD up from the City of David, which is Zion. 3All the men of Israel gathered before the king at the feast in the seventh month. 4And all the elders of Israel came, and the Levites took up the ark. 5The Levitical priests brought up the ark, the Tent of Meeting, and all the holy utensils that were in the Tent. 6And King Solomon and all the assembly of Israel who gathered together with him before the ark were sacrificing so many sheep and oxen that they could not be counted or numbered. 7Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of the LORD to its place, to the inner sanctuary of the house, into the Holy of Holies, under the wings of the cherubim; 8for the cherubim spread out their wings over the place of the ark, making a covering above the ark and its carrying poles. 9The poles were so long that the ends of the poles of the ark were visible from the front of the Holy of Holies (inner sanctuary), but were not visible from the outside. They are there to this day. 10There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets [of the Ten Commandments] which Moses put there at Mount Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the Israelites, when they came out of Egypt.

The Glory of God Fills the Temple 11When the priests came out of the Holy Place (for all the priests who were present had sanctified themselves [separating themselves from everything unclean], without regard to their assigned divisions), 12and all of the Levitical singers, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun, with their sons and relatives, clothed in fine linen, with cymbals, harps, and lyres were standing at the east end of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests blowing trumpets 13in unison when the trumpeters and singers were to make themselves heard with one voice praising and thanking the LORD, and when they raised their voices accompanied by the trumpets and cymbals and [other] instruments of music, and when they praised the LORD, saying, “For He is good, for His mercy and lovingkindness endure forever,” then the house of the LORD was filled with a cloud, 14so that the priests could not remain standing to minister because of the cloud; for the glory and brilliance of the LORD filled the house of God.

2 Chronicles 6
Solomon’s Dedication

1Then Solomon said,
“The LORD has said that He would dwell in the thick cloud.
2“I have built You a lofty house,
A place for You to dwell forever.”

3Then the king turned around and blessed the entire assembly of Israel, while they were all standing. 4And he said, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who spoke with His mouth to my father David and has fulfilled with His hands what He promised, saying, 5‘Since the day that I brought My people out of the land of Egypt, I did not choose a city among all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house so that My Name (Presence) might be there, nor did I choose any man to be a leader over My people Israel; 6but I have chosen Jerusalem that My Name might be there, and I have chosen David to be over My people Israel.’ 7Now it was in the heart of my father David to build a house for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel. 8But the LORD said to my father David, ‘Because it was in your heart to build a house for My Name, you did well that it was in your heart. 9‘Nevertheless you shall not build the house, but your son who will be born to you, he shall build the house for My Name.’ 10Now the LORD has fulfilled His word which He spoke; for I have risen in place of my father David and I sit on the throne of Israel, just as the LORD promised, and have built the house for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel. 11“There I have placed the ark [the symbol of His Presence] in which is the covenant of the LORD [the Ten Commandments], which He made with the people (descendants) of Israel.”

Solomon’s Prayer of Dedication 12Then Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in the presence of the entire assembly of Israel and spread out his hands. 13For Solomon had made a bronze platform, five cubits square and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the courtyard; and he stood on it, and he knelt down on his knees in the presence of all the assembly of Israel and spread out his hands toward heaven, 14and he said, “O LORD, God of Israel, there is no god like You in heaven or on the earth, keeping covenant and showing mercy and lovingkindness to Your servants who walk before You [in obedience] with all their heart, 15[You] who have kept Your promise to Your servant David, my father, that which You told him; You have spoken with Your mouth and have fulfilled it with Your hand, as it is today. 16Now therefore, O LORD, the God of Israel, keep with Your servant David, my father, that which You promised him, saying, ‘You shall not fail to have a man to sit on the throne of Israel, provided your sons are careful to walk in My law as you, [David,] have walked before Me.’ 17Now then, O LORD, the God of Israel, let Your word which You have spoken to Your servant David be confirmed (verified).

18“But will God actually dwell with mankind on the earth? Behold, heaven and the highest heaven cannot contain You; how much less this house which I have built! 19Yet have regard for the prayer of Your servant and for his supplication, O LORD my God, to listen to the cry and to the prayer which Your servant prays before You, 20that Your eyes may be open toward this house day and night, toward the place in which You have said that You would put Your Name (Presence), to listen to the prayer which Your servant shall pray toward this place. 21So listen to the requests of Your servant and Your people Israel when they pray toward this place. Hear from Your dwelling place, from heaven; and when You hear, forgive.

22“If a man sins against his neighbor, and he is required to take an oath, and he comes and takes the oath before Your altar in this house, 23then hear from heaven and act and judge Your servants, punishing the wicked by bringing his conduct on his own head, and providing justice to the righteous by giving to him in accordance with his righteousness (innocence).

24“If Your people Israel have been defeated by an enemy because they have sinned against You, and they return to You and confess Your name, and pray and make supplication before You in this house, 25then hear from heaven and forgive the sin of Your people Israel, and bring them again to the land which You gave to them and to their fathers.

26“When the heavens are shut up and there is no rain because Your people have sinned against You, and they pray toward this place and confess Your name, and turn from their sin when You afflict and humble them; 27then hear in heaven and forgive the sin of Your servants and Your people Israel, indeed, teach them the good way in which they should walk. And send rain on Your land which You have given to Your people as an inheritance.

28“If there is famine in the land, if there is pestilence, if there is blight or mildew, if there are [migratory] locusts or grasshoppers, if their enemies besiege them in the land of their cities, whatever plague or whatever sickness there is, 29then whatever prayer or request is made by any man or all of Your people Israel, each knowing his own suffering and his own pain, and stretching out his hands toward this house, 30then hear from heaven, Your dwelling place, and forgive, and render to each in accordance with all his ways, whose heart You know; for You alone know the hearts of the sons of men, 31so that they may fear You, to walk in Your ways [in obedience to You] as long as they live in the land which You have given to our fathers.

32“Also in regard to the foreigner who is not from Your people Israel, but has come from a far country for the sake of Your great name and Your mighty power and Your outstretched arm—when they come and pray toward this house, 33then hear from heaven, from Your dwelling place, and do according to all for which the foreigner calls to You, so that all the peoples of the earth may know Your name, and fear You [reverently and worshipfully], as do Your people Israel, and that they may know that this house which I have built is called by Your Name.

34“When Your people go out to war against their enemies, by the way that You send them, and they pray to You facing this city [Jerusalem] which You have chosen and the house which I have built for Your Name, 35then hear from heaven their prayer and their request, and maintain their cause and do justice.

36“When they sin against You (for there is no man who does not sin) and You are angry with them and hand them over to an enemy, so that they take them away captive to a land far away or near, 37if they take it to heart in the land where they have been taken captive, and repent and pray to You in the land of their captivity, saying, ‘We have sinned, we have done wrong and have acted wickedly’; 38if they return to You with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, and pray facing their land which You have given to their fathers and toward the city which You have chosen, and toward the house which I have built for Your Name; 39then hear from heaven, from Your dwelling place, their prayer and requests, and maintain their cause and do justice and forgive Your people who have sinned against You.

40“Now, O my God, I pray, let Your eyes be open and Your ears attentive to the prayer offered in this place.

41“Now then arise, O LORD God, [and come] to Your resting place, You and the ark of Your strength and power. Let Your priests, O LORD God, be clothed with salvation and let Your godly ones rejoice in [Your] goodness.

42“O LORD God, do not turn away and reject the face of Your anointed; remember Your lovingkindness and faithfulness to Your servant David.”

2 Chronicles 7
The Shekinah Glory

1When Solomon had finished praying, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and the [Shekinah] glory and brilliance of the LORD filled the house. 2The priests could not enter the house of the LORD because the glory and brilliance of the LORD had filled the LORD’S house. 3When all the people of Israel saw how the fire came down and saw the glory and brilliance of the LORD upon the house, they bowed down on the stone pavement with their faces to the ground, and they worshiped and praised the LORD, saying, “For He is good, for His mercy and lovingkindness endure forever.”

Sacrifices Offered 4Then the king and all the people offered a sacrifice before the LORD. 5King Solomon offered a sacrifice of 22,000 oxen and 120,000 sheep. In this way the king and all the people dedicated God’s house. 6The priests stood at their posts [ready for service], and the Levites also, with the musical instruments of the LORD which King David had made to praise the LORD, saying, “For His lovingkindness and mercy endure forever,” whenever David offered praise through their ministry. The priests were opposite the Levites blowing the trumpets and all Israel was standing.

7Moreover, Solomon consecrated the middle of the courtyard that was in front of the house of the LORD, for it was there that he offered burnt offerings and the fat of the peace offerings because the bronze altar which he had made was not sufficient to hold the burnt offerings, the grain offerings, and the fat [all together].

The Feast of Dedication 8At that time Solomon observed the feast for seven days, and all Israel with him, a very large assembly, from the entrance of Hamath to the Brook of Egypt. 9On the eighth day they held a celebration, for they had observed the dedication of the altar for seven days, and the feast for seven days. 10And on the twenty-third day of the seventh month Solomon sent the people to their tents, rejoicing and happy in heart because of the goodness that the LORD had shown to David, to Solomon, and to His people Israel.

God’s Promise and Warning 11And so Solomon finished the house (temple) of the LORD and the palace of the king. He successfully accomplished all that he had planned to do in the house of the LORD and in his palace.

12Then the LORD appeared to Solomon by night and said to him: “I have heard your prayer and have chosen this place for Myself as a house of sacrifice. 13If I shut up the heavens so that no rain falls, or if I command locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence and plague among My people, 14and My people, who are called by My Name, humble themselves, and pray and seek (crave, require as a necessity) My face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear [them] from heaven, and forgive their sin and heal their land. 15Now My eyes will be open and My ears attentive to prayer offered in this place. 16For now I have chosen and sanctified and set apart for My purpose this house that My Name may be here forever, and My eyes and My heart will be here perpetually. 17As for you [Solomon], if you will walk before me as your father David walked, and do everything that I have commanded you, and observe My statutes and My ordinances, 18then I will establish your royal throne just as I covenanted with your father David, saying, ‘You will not fail to have a man as ruler in Israel.’

19“But if you [people] turn away and abandon My statutes and My commandments which I have set before you, and you go and serve other gods and worship them, 20then I will uproot Israel from My land which I have given them; and I will cast this house, which I have consecrated for My Name, out of My sight, and will make it a proverb and an object of scorn among all nations. 21And as for this house, which was so exalted, everyone who passes by it will be astonished and appalled and say, ‘Why has the LORD done thus to this land and to this house?’ 22“Then people will say, ‘It is because they abandoned the LORD, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and they adopted other gods, and worshiped them and served them; therefore He has brought all this adversity and evil on them.’”

2 Chronicles 8
Solomon’s Activities And Accomplishments

1Now it came about at the end of the twenty years, in which Solomon had built the house of the LORD and his own house (palace), 2that he built and fortified the cities which Huram (Hiram) had given to him, and settled the Israelites there.

3Then Solomon went to Hamath-zobah and captured it. 4He built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all his storage cities in Hamath. 5He also built upper Beth-horon and lower Beth-horon, fortified cities with walls, gates, and bars [to lock the gates]; 6and Baalath and all the storage cities that Solomon had, and all the cities for his chariots and the cities for his horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, in Lebanon, and in all the land under his rule.

7All the people who were left of the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of Israel, 8but were descendants of those who were left in the land, whom the Israelites had not destroyed—Solomon brought them up as forced laborers to this day. 9But Solomon did not make slaves of the Israelites for his work; they were men of war, his chief captains, and commanders of his chariots and his horsemen. 10These were the chief officers of King Solomon, two hundred and fifty [in authority] who ruled over the people.

11Then Solomon brought the daughter of Pharaoh up from the City of David into the house (palace) he had built for her, for he said, “My wife shall not live in the house of David king of Israel, because the places where the ark of the LORD has entered are holy.”

12Then Solomon offered burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of the LORD which he had built in front of the porch [of the temple], 13a certain number every day, offering them up as Moses commanded for the Sabbaths, the New Moons, and the three annual feasts—the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Booths (Tabernacles).

14Now in accordance with the ordinance of his father David, he appointed the divisions of the priests for their service, and the Levites for their duties of praise and ministering and serving before the priests as every day required, and the gatekeepers by their divisions at every gate; for David the man of God had so commanded. 15And they did not deviate from the commandment of the king to the priests and Levites in any respect or in regard to the storehouses or treasuries.

16Thus all the work of Solomon was carried out from the day the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid until it was finished. So the house of the LORD was completed.

17Then Solomon went to Ezion-geber and to Eloth on the shore of the [Red] Sea in the land of Edom. 18And Huram (Hiram) sent him, by his servants, ships and servants familiar with the sea; and they went with Solomon’s servants to Ophir, and took from there four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to King Solomon.

2 Chronicles 9
Visit Of The Queen Of Sheba

1When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to Jerusalem to test Solomon with riddles. She was accompanied by a very large number of attendants, with camels bearing spices (balsam oil) and a large amount of gold and precious stones. And when she came to Solomon, she talked with him about all that was on her mind. 2Solomon answered all her questions; nothing was hidden from him which he did not make clear to her. 3So when the queen of Sheba saw the [depth of] Solomon’s wisdom, and the house which he had built, 4and the food of his table, the [vast] seating order of his officials, the attendance and service of his ministers and their attire, his cupbearers and their attire, and his stairway by which he went up to the house of the LORD, she was breathless. 5She said to the king, “The report which I heard in my own land regarding your [accomplishments and your] words and your wisdom was true, 6but I did not believe the reports until I came and saw it with my own eyes. Behold, the half of the greatness of your wisdom was not told to me; you have surpassed the report that I heard. 7Blessed and fortunate are your people, how blessed and fortunate are these servants of yours who stand before you continually and hear your wisdom! 8“Blessed be the LORD your God, who delighted in you, setting you on His throne as king for the LORD your God; because your God loved Israel, establishing them forever, therefore He made you king over them, to do justice and righteousness.” 9Then she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, a very large amount of spices (balsam oil) and precious stones; there was no such spice [anywhere] like that which the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.

10The servants of Huram and those of Solomon, who brought gold from Ophir, also brought almug trees and precious stones. 11From the almug timber the king made stairways for the house of the LORD and for the king’s palace, and lyres and harps for the singers; none like that was seen before in the land of Judah.

12King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all [the things] she desired, whatever she asked, besides a return for what she had brought to the king. So she returned to her own land with her servants.

Solomon’s Wealth and Power 13Now the weight of gold which came to Solomon in one year was 666 talents, 14besides what the traders and merchants brought; and all the kings of Arabia and the governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon. 15King Solomon made two hundred large shields of beaten gold, using six hundred shekels of beaten gold on each large shield. 16And he made three hundred [smaller] shields of beaten gold, using three hundred shekels of gold on each shield; and the king put them in the house of the Forest of Lebanon.

17Moreover, the king made a great throne of ivory and overlaid it with pure gold. 18There were six steps to the throne and a golden footstool attached to the throne, and arms on each side of the seat, with two lions standing beside the arms. 19Also, twelve lions were standing there, one on each side of the six steps. Nothing like it had ever been made for any [other] kingdom. 20All King Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; silver was not considered valuable in the days of Solomon. 21For the king’s ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram; once every three years the ships of Tarshish came bringing gold and silver, ivory and apes and peacocks.

22So King Solomon surpassed all the kings of the earth in wealth and wisdom. 23And all the kings of the earth were seeking the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom which God had put into his heart. 24Each man brought his gift, articles of silver and gold, garments, weapons, spices, horses and mules, so much year by year.

25Now Solomon had 4,000 stalls for horses and chariots, and 12,000 horsemen, and he stationed them in the chariot cities or with the king at Jerusalem. 26He ruled over all the kings from the Euphrates River to the land of the Philistines, and as far as the border of Egypt. 27The king made silver in Jerusalem as common as stones, and cedar wood as plentiful as the sycamore-fig trees that are in the lowland. 28And they were importing horses for Solomon from Egypt and from all [the other] countries.

29Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, from the first to the last, are they not written in the records of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Nebat? 30Solomon reigned forty years in Jerusalem over all Israel. Death of Solomon 31And Solomon slept with his fathers [in death]; he was buried in the city of his father David. Rehoboam his son reigned in his place.

2 Chronicles 10
Rehoboam’s Reign Of Folly

1Then Rehoboam went to Shechem, because all Israel had come to Shechem to make him king. 2When Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard about the new king (for he was in Egypt, where he had fled from the presence of King Solomon), Jeroboam returned from Egypt. 3And the people sent messengers and summoned him. So when Jeroboam and all Israel came, they spoke to Rehoboam, saying, 4“Your father [King Solomon] made our yoke hard (heavy, difficult); so now lighten the hard service of your father and his heavy yoke which he put on us, and we will serve you.” 5Rehoboam replied, “Come back to me again in three days.” So the people departed.

6Then King Rehoboam consulted with the elders who had served his father Solomon [as advisers] while he was alive, asking, “What advice do you give me in answer to these people?” 7They answered him, saying, “If you are kind to these people and please them and speak good words to them, then they will be your servants forever.” 8But the king rejected the advice which the elders gave him, and consulted with the young men who grew up with him and served him [as advisers]. 9He asked them, “What advice do you give to us regarding the answer to these people, who have spoken to me, saying, ‘Lighten the yoke which your father put on us’?” 10The young men who grew up with him told him, “Tell the people who said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you make it lighter for us’: ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s loins! 11‘Now my father loaded you with a heavy yoke, but I will add [more weight] to your yoke. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions (extremely painful scourges).’”

12So on the third day Jeroboam and all the people returned to Rehoboam just as the king had directed, saying, “Return to me on the third day.” 13The king answered them harshly, for King Rehoboam rejected the counsel of the elders. 14He spoke to them in accordance with the advice of the young men, saying, “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to it; my father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.” 15So the king did not listen to the people, for the turn of events was from God that the LORD might fulfill His word, which He had spoken through Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

16When all Israel saw that the king did not listen and pay attention to them, the people answered him,
“What portion do we have in David?
We have no inheritance in the son of Jesse.
Every man to your tents, O Israel;
Now, [Rehoboam, descendant of] David, see to your own house.”
So all Israel went to their tents. 17But as for the Israelites who lived in Judah’s cities, Rehoboam ruled over them. 18Then King Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who was over the forced labor, and the Israelites stoned him and he died. And King Rehoboam hurried to mount his [royal] chariot to escape to Jerusalem. 19And Israel has rebelled against the house of David to this day.
2 Chronicles 11
Rehoboam Reigns Over Judah And Builds Cities

1Now when Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled the house of Judah and Benjamin, 180,000 chosen warriors to fight against [the ten tribes of] Israel to restore the kingdom to Rehoboam. 2But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying, 3“Say to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, 4‘Thus says the LORD: “You shall not go up nor fight against your brothers (countrymen); return, every man to his house, for this thing is from Me.”’” And they listened to and obeyed the words of the LORD and turned back from going against Jeroboam.

5Rehoboam lived in Jerusalem and built [fortified] cities for defense in Judah. 6He built Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa, 7Beth-zur, Soco, Adullam, 8Gath, Mareshah, Ziph, 9Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah, 10Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron, which are fortified cities in Judah and Benjamin. 11He strengthened the fortresses and put officers in them, with supplies of food, [olive] oil, and wine. 12And in each city he put [large] shields and spears, and made them very strong. So he held Judah and Benjamin.

13Further, the priests and the Levites who were in all Israel took their stand with Rehoboam from all their districts. Jeroboam Appoints False Priests 14For the Levites left their pasture lands and their property and came to Judah and Jerusalem, because Jeroboam and his sons had excluded them from serving as priests to the LORD. 15Jeroboam appointed his own priests for the high places, for the satyrs (goat demons) and calves (idols) which he had made. 16Those from all the tribes of Israel who set their hearts on seeking the LORD God of Israel followed them to Jerusalem, to sacrifice to the LORD God of their fathers. 17So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah and supported Rehoboam the son of Solomon for three years; for they walked in the way of David and Solomon for three years.

Rehoboam’s Family 18Rehoboam took as his wife Mahalath, the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David, and of Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse. 19She bore him sons: Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham. 20After her he took Maacah the daughter (granddaughter) of Absalom, and she bore him Abijah, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith. 21Rehoboam loved Maacah the daughter (granddaughter) of Absalom more than all his wives and concubines—for he had taken eighteen wives and sixty concubines, and he fathered twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters. 22Rehoboam appointed Abijah the son of Maacah the chief leader among his brothers, because he intended to make him king. 23He acted wisely and distributed some of his sons throughout the territories of Judah and Benjamin to all the fortified cities. He gave them abundant provisions, and he sought many wives for them.

2 Chronicles 12
Shishak Of Egypt Invades Judah

1When the kingdom of Rehoboam was established and strong, he and all Israel with him abandoned the law of the LORD. 2And it came about in King Rehoboam’s fifth year, because they had been unfaithful to the LORD, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem 3with 1,200 chariots and 60,000 horsemen. The people who came with him from Egypt were beyond counting—the Lubim, the Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians. 4Shishak took the fortified cities of Judah and came as far as Jerusalem. 5Then Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam and the leaders of Judah who had gathered at Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said to them, “Thus says the LORD: ‘You have abandoned (turned away from) Me, so I have abandoned you into the hands of Shishak.’” 6Then the leaders of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said, “The LORD is righteous.”

7When the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, “They have humbled themselves so I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some measure of a remnant [that escapes]; and My wrath shall not be poured out on Jerusalem by means of Shishak. 8“Nevertheless they will become his slaves, so that they may know [the difference between] My service and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.”

Plunder Impoverishes Judah 9So Shishak king of Egypt went up against Jerusalem; he took the treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king’s house (palace). He took everything. He even took the shields of gold which Solomon had made. 10In their place King Rehoboam made shields of bronze and entrusted them to the care of the officers of the guard who guarded the door of the king’s house. 11And whenever the king entered the house of the LORD, the guards came and carried the shields and then brought them back into the guards’ room. 12When Rehoboam humbled himself, the wrath of the LORD turned away from him, so as not to destroy him completely; and also conditions were good in Judah.

13So King Rehoboam established himself in Jerusalem and reigned. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city in which the LORD had chosen from all the tribes of Israel to put His Name. And his mother was Naamah the Ammonitess. 14He did evil because he did not set his heart to seek and worship and honor the LORD.

15Now the acts of Rehoboam, from the first to the last, are they not written in the records of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer, according to genealogical enrollment? There were wars between Rehoboam [of Judah] and Jeroboam [of Israel] continually. 16And Rehoboam slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried in the City of David; and Abijah his son became king in his place.

2 Chronicles 13
Abijah Succeeds Rehoboam

1In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, Abijah became king over Judah. 2He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah.

And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam [of Israel]. 3Abijah began the battle with an army of brave soldiers, 400,000 chosen men. Jeroboam drew up in battle formation against him with 800,000 chosen men, valiant men.

Civil War 4Then Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim, which is in the hill country of Ephraim, and said, “Listen to me, Jeroboam and all Israel: 5Do you not know that the LORD God of Israel, gave rule over Israel forever to David and to his sons by a covenant of salt [a permanent pact, extending to each generation of Israel]? 6Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, a servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up and rebelled against his lord [the king], 7and worthless (unprincipled, unethical) men gathered around him, useless and wicked men, who proved too strong for Rehoboam the son of Solomon when Rehoboam was young and timid, and could not assert himself against them.

8“And now you intend to assert yourselves against the kingdom of the LORD which is in the hands of the sons of David, since you are a great multitude and have with you the golden calves (idols) which Jeroboam made for you as gods. 9Have you not driven out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, and made priests for yourselves like the peoples of other lands? So whoever comes to consecrate himself with a young bull and seven rams, even he may become a priest of non-existent gods (idols). 10But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not abandoned (turned away from) Him. The sons of Aaron are ministering to the LORD as priests, and the Levites attend to their service. 11Every morning and every evening they offer the burnt offerings and the fragrant incense to the LORD; and the showbread is set on the clean table [of pure gold], and the golden lampstand with its lamps is ready to light every evening; for we keep the charge of the LORD our God [that is, the obligation we have to Him], but you have abandoned (turned away from) Him. 12“Behold, God is with us at our head, and His priests [are here] with their signal trumpets to sound an alarm against you. O sons of Israel, do not fight against the LORD God of your fathers, for you cannot succeed.”

13But Jeroboam had set an ambush to come from the rear, so that Israel was in front of Judah and the ambush was behind them. 14When [the men of] Judah turned around, they were attacked from both front and rear; so they cried out to the LORD [for help], and the priests blew the trumpets. 15Then the men of Judah raised a war cry; and as they shouted, God struck Jeroboam and all Israel [with defeat] before Abijah and Judah. 16And the sons of Israel fled before Judah, and God handed over the sons of Israel to them. 17Abijah and his people inflicted on them a great defeat, so that 500,000 chosen men of Israel fell slain. 18Thus the sons of Israel were subdued (humbled) at that time, and the sons of Judah prevailed because they relied on the LORD, the God of their fathers. 19Abijah pursued Jeroboam and captured [several] cities from him: Bethel, Jeshanah, and Ephraim (Ephron), with their villages. Death of Jeroboam 20Jeroboam did not recover strength again during the time of [the reign of] Abijah. And the LORD struck him and he died.

21But Abijah became powerful. He took fourteen wives for himself and fathered twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters. 22Now the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways and his sayings, are written in the writing of the prophet Iddo.

2 Chronicles 14
Asa Succeeds Abijah In Judah

1So Abijah slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him in the City of David; and Asa his son became king in his place. The land was at peace for ten years during his days.

2Asa did what was good and right in the sight of the LORD his God. 3He removed the foreign altars and high places and tore down the [pagan] pillars (obelisks, memorial stones), and cut to pieces the Asherim [the symbols of the goddess Asherah]. 4And he commanded Judah to seek the LORD God of their fathers [to inquire of and for Him and seek Him as a vital necessity], and to observe the law [given to Moses] and the commandment. 5Asa also removed the [idolatrous] high places and the incense altars from all the cities of Judah. The kingdom was at rest and undisturbed under his reign. 6He built fortified cities in Judah, since the land was at rest, and there was no one at war with him in those years, because the LORD had given him rest. 7So he said to Judah, “Let us build these cities and surround them with walls, towers, gates and bars [to secure the doors]. The land is still ours because we have sought the LORD our God; we have sought Him [longing for Him with all our heart] and He has given us peace on every side.” So they built and prospered. 8Now Asa had an army of 300,000 men from Judah, who carried large shields and spears, and 280,000 from Benjamin, who carried shields and drew bows, all courageous men.

9Now Zerah the Ethiopian (Cushite) came out against Judah with an army of a million men and three hundred chariots, and he came as far as Mareshah. 10Then Asa went out against him, and they drew up in battle formation in the Valley of Zephathah at Mareshah. 11Asa called out to the LORD his God, saying, “O LORD, there is no one besides You to help in the battle between the powerful and the weak; so help us, O LORD our God, for we trust in and rely on You, and in Your name we have come against this multitude. O LORD, You are our God; let not man prevail against You.” 12So the LORD struck the Ethiopians [with defeat] before Asa and Judah, and the Ethiopians fled. 13Asa and the people who were with him pursued them as far as Gerar; and so many Ethiopians fell that none of them were found alive; for they were destroyed before the LORD and His army. And they carried away a very large amount of spoil. 14They attacked and destroyed all the cities around Gerar, for the dread of the LORD had fallen on them. They plundered all the cities, for there was a large amount of spoil in them. 15They also struck down the people [living] in tents who had livestock, and took captive large numbers of sheep and camels. Then they returned to Jerusalem.

2 Chronicles 15
The Prophet Azariah Warns Asa

1Now the Spirit of God came on Azariah the son of Oded, 2and he went out to meet Asa and said to him, “Hear me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin: the LORD is with you while you are with Him. If you seek Him [inquiring for and of Him, as your soul’s first necessity], He will let you find Him; but if you abandon (turn away from) Him, He will abandon (turn away from) you. 3Now for a long time Israel was without the true God and without a teaching priest, and without [God’s] law. 4But when they were in their trouble and distress they turned to the LORD God of Israel, and [in desperation earnestly] sought Him, and He let them find Him. 5In those times there was no peace for him who went out or for him who came in, for great suffering came on all the inhabitants of the lands. 6Nation was crushed by nation, and city by city, for God troubled them with every kind of distress. 7“But as for you, be strong and do not lose courage, for there is reward for your work.”

Asa’s Reforms 8And when Asa heard these words, the prophecy of Azariah the son of Oded the prophet, he took courage and removed the repulsive idols from all the land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities which he had captured in the hill country of Ephraim. Then he restored the altar [of burnt offering] of the LORD which was in front of the porch [of the temple] of the LORD. 9He gathered all Judah and Benjamin and the strangers who were with them out of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon, for they came over to Asa from Israel in large numbers when they saw that the LORD his God was with him. 10So they assembled at Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of Asa’s reign. 11They sacrificed to the LORD on that day from the spoil they had brought—700 oxen and 7,000 sheep. 12They entered into a covenant (solemn agreement) to seek the LORD God of their fathers with all their heart and soul; 13and that whoever would not seek the LORD God of Israel, was to be put to death, whether young or old, man or woman. 14They swore an oath to the LORD with a loud voice, with [jubilant] shouting, with trumpets, and with horns. 15All Judah rejoiced over the oath, for they had sworn with all their heart and had sought Him with their whole heart, and He let them find Him. So the LORD gave them rest on every side.

16He also removed Maacah, King Asa’s mother, from the position of queen mother, because she had made a repulsive image for [the goddess] Asherah. Asa cut down her idol, crushed it, and burned it at the Brook Kidron. 17But the high places [of pagan worship] were not removed from Israel. Nevertheless Asa’s heart was blameless all his days. 18He brought the things that his father [Abijah] had dedicated and those things that he had dedicated into the house of God—silver and gold and utensils. 19And there was no war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa’s reign.

2 Chronicles 16
Asa Wars Against Baasha

1In the thirty-sixth year of Asa’s reign Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah and fortified Ramah in order to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to [meet with] Asa king of Judah. 2Then Asa brought out silver and gold from the treasuries of the house of the LORD and from the king’s house, and sent them to Ben-hadad king of Aram (Syria), who lived in Damascus, saying, 3“Let there be a treaty between you and me, as there was between my father and your father. Look, I am sending you silver and gold; go, break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.” 4Ben-hadad listened to King Asa and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they attacked and conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel-maim, and all the storage cities of Naphtali. 5When Baasha heard about it, he ceased fortifying Ramah and stopped his work. 6Then King Asa brought all Judah, and they carried away the stones of Ramah and its timber with which Baasha had been building, and with them he fortified Geba and Mizpah.

Asa Imprisons the Prophet 7At that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah and said to him, “Because you relied on the king of Aram (Syria) and did not rely on the LORD your God, the army of the king of Aram (Syria) has escaped out of your hand. 8Were not the Ethiopians and Lubim a huge army with a great number of chariots and horsemen? Yet because you relied on the LORD, He placed them in your hand. 9“For the eyes of the LORD move to and fro throughout the earth so that He may support those whose heart is completely His. You have acted foolishly in this; therefore, from now on you will have wars.” 10Then Asa was angry with the seer and put him in prison [in the stocks], for he was enraged with him because of this. And at the same time Asa oppressed some of the people.

11Now the acts of Asa, from the first to the last, are written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. 12In the thirty-ninth year of his reign Asa developed a disease in his feet. His disease was severe, yet even in his illness he did not seek the LORD, but [relied only on] the physicians. 13So Asa slept with his fathers [in death], dying in the forty-first year of his reign. 14They buried him in his own tomb which he had cut out for himself in the City of David, and they laid him on a bier which he had filled with various kinds of spices blended by the perfumers’ art; and they made a very great fire in his honor.

2 Chronicles 17
Jehoshaphat Succeeds Asa

1Jehoshaphat his son then became king [of Judah] in Asa’s place, and strengthened his position over Israel. 2He placed troops in all the fortified cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim which his father Asa had captured. His Good Reign 3The LORD was with Jehoshaphat because he followed the example of his father (ancestor) David. He did not seek [to follow] the Baals [the false gods], 4but sought the God of his father, and walked in (obeyed) His commandments, and did not act as Israel did. 5Therefore the LORD established the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought tribute to Jehoshaphat, and he had great wealth and honor. 6His heart was encouraged and he took great pride in the ways of the LORD; moreover, he again removed the high places [of pagan worship] and the Asherim from Judah.

7Then in the third year of his reign he sent his officials, Ben-hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah; 8and with them were the Levites—Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tobadonijah; and with them the priests Elishama and Jehoram. 9They taught in Judah having the Book of the Law of the LORD with them; they went throughout all the cities of Judah and taught among the people.

10Now the dread of the LORD was on all the kingdoms of the lands surrounding Judah, so that they did not make war against Jehoshaphat. 11Some of the Philistines brought gifts and silver as tribute to Jehoshaphat; the Arabians also brought him flocks: 7,700 rams and 7,700 male goats. 12So Jehoshaphat became greater and greater. He built fortresses and storage cities in Judah. 13He had large supplies in the cities of Judah, and soldiers, courageous men, in Jerusalem. 14This was the number of them by their fathers’ (ancestors’) households: of Judah, the commanders of thousands, Adnah the commander, and with him 300,000 courageous men; 15and next to him was Jehohanan the commander, and with him 280,000; 16and next to him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who volunteered for the LORD, and with him 200,000 courageous men; 17and of Benjamin: Eliada, a brave man, and with him 200,000 men armed with bow and shield; 18and next to him was Jehozabad, and with him 180,000 armed and ready for military service. 19These are the ones who were in the service of the king, besides those he had placed in fortified cities throughout Judah.

2 Chronicles 18
Jehoshaphat Allies With Ahab

1Now Jehoshaphat had great wealth and honor, and was allied by marriage with Ahab. 2Some years later he went down to [visit] Ahab in Samaria. And Ahab slaughtered many sheep and oxen for him and the people who were with him, and induced him to go up against Ramoth-gilead. 3Ahab king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, “Will you go with me to [fight against] Ramoth-gilead?” He answered, “I am as you are, and my people as your people [your hopes and concerns are ours]; we will be with you in the battle.”

4Further, Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, “Please inquire first for the word of the LORD.” 5Then the king of Israel assembled the prophets, four hundred men, and said to them, “Shall we go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I refrain?” And they said, “Go up, for God will hand it over to the king.” 6But Jehoshaphat said, “Is there no prophet of the LORD still here by whom we may inquire?” 7The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “There is still one man by whom we may inquire of the LORD, but I hate him, for he never prophesies [anything] good for me, but always evil. He is Micaiah the son of Imla” And Jehoshaphat said, “Let not the king say so [perhaps this time it will be different].” Ahab’s False Prophets Assure Victory 8Then the king of Israel called for an officer and said, “Bring Micaiah the son of Imla quickly.” 9Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah were sitting, each on his throne, arrayed in their robes; they were sitting at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets were prophesying before them. 10Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made horns of iron for himself; and said, “Thus says the LORD: ‘With these you shall gore the Arameans (Syrians) until they are destroyed.’” 11All the prophets prophesied this, saying, “Go up to Ramoth-gilead and succeed; the LORD will hand it over to the king.”

Micaiah Brings Word from God 12The messenger who went to call Micaiah said to him, “Listen, the words of the prophets are of one accord, foretelling a favorable outcome for the king. So just let your word be like one of them and speak favorably.” 13But Micaiah said, “As the LORD lives, I will [only] speak what my God says.”

14When he came to the king, the king said to him, “Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I refrain?” And he said, “Go up and succeed, for they will be handed over to you.” 15Then the king said to him, “How many times must I warn you (make you swear an oath) to tell me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?” 16Then Micaiah said,
“I saw all [the people of] Israel
Scattered on the mountains,
As sheep that have no shepherd;
And the LORD said,
‘These have no master.
Let each one return to his house in peace.’”

17Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not tell you that he would not prophesy good in regard to me, but [only] evil?”

18So Micaiah said, “Therefore, hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host (army) of heaven standing on His right and on His left. 19Then the LORD said, ‘Who will entice Ahab king of Israel to go up and fall [defeated] at Ramoth-gilead?’ And one said this and another said that. 20Then a spirit came forward and stood before the LORD and said, ‘I will entice him.’ The LORD said to him, ‘By what means?’ 21He said, ‘I will go out and be a deceptive spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ Then the LORD said, ‘You are to entice him and also succeed. Go and do so.’ 22“Now, you see, the LORD put a deceptive spirit in the mouth of these prophets of yours; and the LORD has [actually] proclaimed disaster against you.”

23Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came up and struck Micaiah on the cheek and said, “Which way did the Spirit of the LORD go [when he departed] from me to speak to you?” 24Micaiah said, “Behold, you will see on that day when you go into an inner room [desperately trying] to hide yourself.” 25Then the king of Israel said, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon the governor of the city and to Joash the king’s son, 26and say, ‘Thus says the king: “Put this man in prison and feed him just enough bread and water to survive until I return in peace (safely).”’” 27But Micaiah said, “If you actually return in peace, the LORD has not spoken by me.” And he added, “Listen [to what I have said], you people, all of you.”

Ahab’s Defeat and Death 28So [Ahab] the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah went up against Ramoth-gilead. 29The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and will go into battle, but you put on your [royal] robes.” So the king of Israel disguised himself, and they went into the battle. 30Now the king of Aram (Syria) had commanded the captains of his chariots, saying, “Do not fight with the small or the great, but only with the king of Israel.” 31So when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat [of Judah], they said, “It is the king of Israel!” So they turned to fight against him, but Jehoshaphat called out [for God’s help], and the LORD helped him; and God diverted them away from him. 32When the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him. 33Then a certain man drew his bow at random and struck [Ahab] the king of Israel between the scales of his armor. So Ahab said to his chariot driver, “Turn around and take me out of the battle, because I am seriously wounded.” 34The battle raged that day, and the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot in front of the Arameans (Syrians) until the evening, and at sunset he died.

2 Chronicles 19
Jehu Rebukes Jehoshaphat

1Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned safely to his house (palace) in Jerusalem. 2Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him and said to King Jehoshaphat, “Should you help the ungodly and love those who hate the LORD and in doing so bring wrath from the LORD on yourself? 3“But there are some good things found in you, for you have removed the Asherim (idols) from the land and you have set your heart to seek God [with all your soul’s desire].”

4So Jehoshaphat lived in Jerusalem, and he went out again among the people from Beersheba to the hill country of Ephraim and brought them back to the LORD, the God of their fathers. Reforms Instituted 5He appointed judges in the land in all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city, 6and he said to the judges, “Be careful what you do, for you do not judge for man, but for the LORD who is with you in the matter of judgment. 7“So now let the fear (reverent awe) of the LORD be on you [to keep you from making unjust decisions]; be careful in what you do, for there is no injustice with the LORD our God, or partiality, or acceptance of a bribe.”

8In Jerusalem also Jehoshaphat appointed some of the Levites, priests, and heads of the fathers’ households of Israel to render the judgment of the LORD and to judge disputes among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 9Then the king commanded them, “Do this in the fear of the LORD, faithfully and wholeheartedly. 10Whenever any dispute comes to you from your brothers (relatives) who live in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, or between statutes and judgments, you are to warn [and instruct] them so that they may not be guilty before the LORD; otherwise [God’s] wrath will come on you and your brothers. Do this and you will not be guilty. 11“Behold, Amariah the chief priest will be over you in all matters of the LORD, and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the governor of the house of Judah, in all the king’s matters; and the Levites will serve you as officers. Deal courageously, and may the LORD be with the upright.”

2 Chronicles 20
Judah Invaded

1Now it happened after this that the Moabites and the Ammonites, together with some of the Meunites, came to make war against Jehoshaphat. 2Then it was reported to Jehoshaphat, “A great multitude has come against you from beyond the [Dead] Sea, out of Aram (Syria); and behold, they are in Hazazon-tamar (that is, Engedi).” 3Then Jehoshaphat was afraid and set himself [determinedly, as his vital need] to seek the LORD; and he proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah. 4So [the people of] Judah gathered together to seek help from the LORD; indeed they came from all the cities of Judah to seek the LORD [longing for Him with all their heart].

Jehoshaphat’s Prayer 5Then Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the LORD in front of the new courtyard, 6and said, “O LORD, God of our fathers, are You not God in heaven? And do You not rule over all the kingdoms of the nations? Power and might are in Your hand, there is no one able to take a stand against You. 7O our God, did You not drive out the inhabitants of this land before Your people Israel and give it forever to the descendants of Your friend Abraham? 8They have lived in it, and have built You a sanctuary in it for Your Name, saying, 9‘If evil comes on us, or the sword of judgment, or plague, or famine, we will stand before this house and before You (for Your Name and Your Presence is in this house) and we will cry out to You in our distress, and You will hear and save us.’ 10Now behold, the sons of Ammon and Moab and Mount Seir, whom You would not allow Israel to invade when they came from the land of Egypt (for they turned away from them and did not destroy them), 11here they are, rewarding us by coming to drive us out of Your possession which You have given us as an inheritance. 12“O our God, will You not judge them? For we are powerless against this great multitude which is coming against us. We do not know what to do, but our eyes are on You.”

13So all Judah stood before the LORD, with their infants, their wives, and their children. Jahaziel Answers the Prayer 14Then in the midst of the assembly the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph. 15He said, “Listen carefully, all [you people of] Judah, and you inhabitants of Jerusalem, and King Jehoshaphat. The LORD says this to you: ‘Be not afraid or dismayed at this great multitude, for the battle is not yours, but God’s. 16‘Go down against them tomorrow. Behold, they will come up by the ascent of Ziz, and you will find them at the end of the river valley, in front of the Wilderness of Jeruel. 17‘You need not fight in this battle; take your positions, stand and witness the salvation of the LORD who is with you, O Judah and Jerusalem. Do not fear or be dismayed; tomorrow go out against them, for the LORD is with you.’”

18Jehoshaphat bowed with his face to the ground, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before the LORD, worshiping Him. 19The Levites, from the sons of the Kohathites and the sons of the Korahites, stood up to praise the LORD God of Israel, with a very loud voice.

Enemies Destroy Themselves 20So they got up early in the morning and went out into the Wilderness of Tekoa; and as they went out, Jehoshaphat stood and said, “Hear me, O Judah, and you inhabitants of Jerusalem! Believe and trust in the LORD your God and you will be established (secure). Believe and trust in His prophets and succeed.” 21When he had consulted with the people, he appointed those who sang to the LORD and those who praised Him in their holy (priestly) attire, as they went out before the army and said, “Praise and give thanks to the LORD, for His mercy and lovingkindness endure forever.” 22When they began singing and praising, the LORD set ambushes against the sons of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, who had come against Judah; so they were struck down [in defeat]. 23For the sons of Ammon and Moab [suspecting betrayal] rose up against the inhabitants of Mount Seir, completely destroying them; and when they had finished with the inhabitants of Seir, they helped to destroy one another.

24When [the men of] Judah came to the lookout tower of the wilderness, they looked toward the multitude, and behold, they were dead bodies lying on the ground, and no one had escaped. 25When Jehoshaphat and his people came to take their spoil, they found much among them, including equipment, garments, and valuable things which they took for themselves, more than they could carry away; so much that they spent three days gathering the spoil. Triumphant Return to Jerusalem 26Then on the fourth day they assembled in the Valley of Beracah, for it was there that they blessed the LORD. For that reason they named that place “The Valley of Beracah (blessing)” until today. 27Then they returned to Jerusalem with joy, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, led by Jehoshaphat, for the LORD had made them rejoice over their enemies. 28They came to Jerusalem with harps, lyres, and trumpets to the house (temple) of the LORD. 29And the fear of God came on all the kingdoms of those countries when they heard that the LORD had fought against the enemies of Israel. 30So the kingdom of Jehoshaphat was quiet, for his God gave him rest on all sides.

31Now Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem for twenty-five-years. His mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 32He walked in the way of his father Asa and did not depart from it, doing what was right in the sight of the LORD. 33Only the high places [for pagan sacrifices] were not removed, for the people had not yet set their hearts firmly on the God of their fathers.

34Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, from the first to the last, behold, they are written in the records of Jehu the son of Hanani, which are recorded in the Book of the Kings of Israel.

Alliance Displeases God 35After [all] this Jehoshaphat king of Judah made an alliance with Ahaziah king of Israel, and he acted wickedly in doing so. 36He joined him in building ships to go to Tarshish [for trade], and they built them in Ezion-geber. 37Then Eliezer the son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, “Because you have allied yourself with Ahaziah, the LORD has broken down what you have built.” So the ships were wrecked and were unable to go to Tarshish.

2 Chronicles 21
Jehoram Succeeds Jehoshaphat In Judah

1Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers [in death] and was buried with them in the City of David; and his son Jehoram became king in his place. 2He had brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat: Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azaryahu, Michael, and Shephatiah. All of these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 3Their father gave them many gifts of silver, gold, and valuable things, in addition to fortified cities in Judah; but he gave the kingdom to Jehoram because he was the firstborn.

4When Jehoram had ascended over the kingdom of his father and made himself secure, he killed all his brothers with the sword [to eliminate any rivals], and some of the leaders of Israel as well. 5Jehoram was thirty-two years of age when he became king, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. 6He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, just as the house of Ahab had done (for he married the daughter of Ahab), and he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD. 7Yet the LORD would not destroy the house of David because of the covenant which He had made with David, and because He had promised to give a lamp to him and to his sons forever.

Revolt against Judah 8In the days of Jehoram Edom revolted against the rule of Judah and set up a king over themselves. 9Then Jehoram crossed over [the Jordan River] with his commanders and all his chariots, and rose up by night and struck down the Edomites who were surrounding him and the commanders of the chariots. 10So Edom revolted against the rule of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time against Jehoram’s rule, because he had abandoned (turned away from) the LORD God of his fathers. 11Moreover, he made [idolatrous] high places in the hill country of Judah, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to be unfaithful [to God], and he led Judah astray [compelling the people’s cooperation].

12Then a letter came to Jehoram from Elijah the prophet, saying, “Thus says the LORD God of David your father (ancestor): ‘Because you have not walked in the ways of your father Jehoshaphat nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah, 13but have walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and caused Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to be unfaithful [to God] as the house of Ahab was unfaithful, and you have also murdered your brothers, your father’s house (your own family), who were better than you, 14behold, the LORD is going to strike your people, your sons, your wives, and all your possessions with a great disaster; 15and you will suffer a severe illness, an intestinal disease, until your intestines come out because of the sickness, day after day.’”

16Then the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the spirit (anger) of the Philistines and of the Arabs who bordered the Ethiopians. 17They came against Judah and invaded it, and carried away all the possessions found in the king’s house (palace), together with his sons and his wives; so there was not a son left to him except Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.

18After all this, the LORD struck Jehoram with an incurable intestinal disease. 19Now it came about in the course of time, at the end of two years, that his intestines came out because of his disease and he died in excruciating pain. And his people did not make a funeral fire to honor him, like the fire for his fathers. 20Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years; and he departed with no one’s regret (sorrow). They buried him in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.

2 Chronicles 22
Ahaziah Succeeds Jehoram In Judah

1Then the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah, his youngest son, king in his place, because the band of men (raiders) who came with the Arabs to the camp had killed all the older sons. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah began to reign. 2Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah, a granddaughter of Omri. 3He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, for his mother was his adviser [and she encouraged him] to act wickedly. 4So he did evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of Ahab, for they were his advisers after the death of his father, resulting in his destruction. Ahaziah Allies with Jehoram of Israel 5He also walked in accordance with their advice, and he went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to wage war against Hazael king of Aram (Syria) at Ramoth-gilead. And the Arameans wounded Joram (Jehoram). 6Then he returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds they had inflicted on him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. And Ahaziah, the son of Jehoram king of Judah, went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.

7But the downfall of Ahaziah was ordained by God, in that he went to Joram (Jehoram). For when he arrived there he went out [as an ally] with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to destroy the house of Ahab. Jehu Murders Leaders of Judah 8It came about that when Jehu was executing judgment on the house of Ahab, he found the leaders of Judah and the sons of Ahaziah’s [murdered] brothers ministering to Ahaziah, and he killed them. 9Jehu also searched for Ahaziah, who was hiding in Samaria; he was captured, brought to Jehu, and put to death. They buried him, for they said, “After all, he is the grandson of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart.” So the house of Ahaziah had no one left to retain the power to rule over the kingdom.

10Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she rose and destroyed all the royal family of the house of Judah. 11But Jehoshabeath, the king’s daughter, took Joash the [infant] son of Ahaziah and stole him away from among the king’s sons who were being put to death, and she placed him and his nurse in the bedroom. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of King Jehoram [of Judah] and wife of Jehoiada the priest, hid Joash from [his grandmother] Athaliah so that she did not murder him (for Jehoshabeath was the sister of Ahaziah). 12Joash was hidden with them in the house (temple) of God for six years, and Athaliah reigned over the land.

2 Chronicles 23
Jehoiada Sets Joash On The Throne Of Judah

1In the seventh year Jehoiada [the priest] summoned his courage and took the captains of hundreds: Azariah the son of Jeroham, Ishmael the son of Johanan, Azariah the son of Obed, Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, and they entered into a covenant with him. 2They went throughout Judah and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the heads of the households of the fathers (ancestors) in Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 3Then all the assembly made a covenant in the house of God with the king [that is, with the child Joash, to overthrow Athaliah by proclaiming his sovereignty]. And Jehoiada [the priest] said to them, “Behold, the king’s son [Joash] shall reign, as the LORD has said in regard to the sons of David. 4This is what you shall do: a third of you, of the priests and Levites who are resuming service on the Sabbath, shall be gatekeepers, 5a [second] third shall be at the king’s house (palace), and a [final] third at the Gate of the Foundation; and all the people shall be in the courtyards of the house of the LORD. 6But let no one enter the house (temple) of the LORD except the priests and the Levites who minister; they may enter, for they are holy. And let all the people carefully observe the law of the LORD. 7“The Levites shall surround the [young] king, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whoever comes into the temple [breaking through the ranks of the guard to get near Joash] is to be killed. You are to be with the king when he comes in [from the temple chamber where he is hiding] and when he goes out.”

8So the Levites and all Judah acted in accordance with everything that Jehoiada the priest had commanded; and every man took his men who were to resume duty on the Sabbath, with those who were to go off duty on the Sabbath, for Jehoiada the priest did not dismiss [any of] the divisions [from their duties]. 9Then Jehoiada the priest gave to the captains of hundreds the spears and the large and small shields which had been King David’s, which were in the house of God. 10He stationed all the people around the king [as guards for him], every man with his weapon in his hand, from the right side to the left side of the house (temple), by the altar and by the house. 11Then they brought out the king’s son and put the crown on him, and gave him the testimony [a copy of the Mosaic Law] and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him and said, “Long live the king!”

Athaliah Killed 12When Athaliah heard the sound of the people running and praising the king, she went into the house of the LORD to [see what] the people [were doing]. 13She looked, and there was the [young] king, standing by his pillar at the entrance, and the captains and the trumpeters were beside him. And all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets, and the singers with their musical instruments were directing the [singing of] praise. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and cried, “Treason! Treason!” 14So Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds who were appointed over the army and said to them, “Bring her out between the ranks [of soldiers]; and whoever follows her shall be put to death with the sword.” For the priest had said, “Do not let her be put to death in the temple of the LORD.” 15So they seized Athaliah, and when she arrived at the entrance of the Horse Gate of the king’s house (palace), they put her to death there.

Reforms Carried Out 16Then Jehoiada made a covenant between himself, all the people, and the king, that they would be the LORD’S people. 17Then all the people went to the house of Baal and tore it down, and they smashed its altars and its images to pieces, and killed Mattan, the priest of Baal, in front of the altars. 18Also Jehoiada placed the offices and officers of the house of the LORD under the authority of the Levitical priests, whom David had [previously] assigned over the house of the LORD, to offer the burnt offerings of the LORD, as it is written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and singing in accordance with the order of David. 19Jehoiada stationed the gatekeepers [at the gates] of the house of the LORD, so that no one would enter who was in any way unclean. 20He took the captains of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought the king down from the house of the LORD; and they came through the upper gate to the king’s house (palace) and set the king on the throne of the kingdom. 21So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet after Athaliah had been put to death with the sword.

2 Chronicles 24
Young Joash Influenced By Jehoiada

1Joash was seven years old when he became king, and he reigned for forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah from Beersheba. 2Joash did what was right in the sight of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest [his uncle]. 3Jehoiada took two wives for him, and he fathered sons and daughters.

Faithless Priests 4Now it came about after this that Joash decided to restore the house (temple) of the LORD. 5He gathered the priests and the Levites and said to them, “Go out to the cities of Judah and collect money from all Israel to repair the house of your God from year to year; and see that you do it quickly.” But the Levites did not act quickly. 6So the king called for Jehoiada the high priest and said to him, “Why have you not required the Levites to bring in from Judah and Jerusalem the tax for the tent of the testimony which was authorized by Moses, the servant of the LORD and the servant of the assembly of Israel?” 7For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken into the house of God and also had used all the holy and dedicated things of the house of the LORD for the Baals.

Temple Repaired 8So at the king’s command they made a chest and set it outside by the gate of the house of the LORD. 9Then they made a proclamation in Judah and Jerusalem to bring in for the LORD the tax that Moses the servant of God imposed on Israel in the wilderness. 10All the officers and all the people rejoiced and brought their tax and dropped it into the chest until they had finished [and the chest was full]. 11It came about that whenever the Levites brought the chest to the king’s official, and whenever they saw that there was a large amount of money, the king’s secretary and the chief priest’s representative would come and empty the chest, and take it, and return it to its place. They did this day after day and collected a large amount of money. 12The king and Jehoiada gave it to those who did the work of the service of the house of the LORD; and they would hire masons and carpenters (craftsmen) and also those who worked in iron and bronze to repair and restore the house of the LORD. 13So the workmen labored, and the repair work progressed in their hands; and they restored and organized the house of God in accordance with its specifications and strengthened it. 14When they had finished, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada; and it was [melted down and] made into utensils for the house of the LORD, utensils for ministering and for burnt offerings, and bowls and utensils of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of the LORD continually all the days of Jehoiada.

15Now when Jehoiada grew old and was full of days, he died. He was a hundred and thirty years old at his death. 16They buried him in the City of David among the kings, because he had done good [things] in Israel and toward God and His house.

17Now after the death of Jehoiada [the priest, who had hidden Joash], the officials of Judah came and bowed down to King Joash; then the king listened to them. 18They abandoned the house of the LORD, the God of their fathers, and served the Asherim and the idols; so [God’s] wrath came on Judah and Jerusalem for their sin and guilt. 19Yet God sent prophets among them to bring them back to the LORD; these prophets testified against them, but they would not listen.

Joash Murders Son of Jehoiada 20Then the Spirit of God came over Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, and he stood above the people and said to them, “This is what God has said: ‘Why do you transgress the commandments of the LORD so that you cannot prosper? Because you have abandoned (turned away from) the LORD, He has also abandoned (turned away from) you.’” 21So they conspired against Zechariah and stoned him [to death] at the command of the king, in the courtyard of the house of the LORD. 22Thus Joash the king did not remember the kindness which Jehoiada, Zechariah’s father, had shown him, but he murdered his son. And when Zechariah was dying, he said, “May the LORD see this and require an accounting!”

Aram Invades and Defeats Judah 23Now it happened at the end of the year, that the army of Aram (Syria) went up against Joash. They came to Judah and Jerusalem and killed all the leaders among the people and sent all their spoil to the king of Damascus. 24Though the army of the Arameans came with a small company of men, the LORD handed over a very large army into their hands, because Joash and Judah had abandoned (turned away from) the LORD, the God of their fathers. So the Arameans executed judgment against Joash.

25When they left Joash (for they left him very ill), his own servants conspired against him because of the blood of the son of Jehoiada the priest, and they murdered him on his bed. So he died, and they buried him in the City of David, but they did not bury him in the tombs of the kings. 26The conspirators against Joash were Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabitess. 27Now as to his sons and the many prophecies uttered against him and the rebuilding of the house of God, they are written in the commentary on the Book of Kings. Then his son Amaziah became king in his place.

2 Chronicles 25
Amaziah Succeeds Joash In Judah

1Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned for twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 2He did right in the sight of the LORD, yet not wholeheartedly. 3When his kingdom was firmly established, he killed his servants who had struck down his father the king. 4But he did not kill their children; for he did as it is written in the Law, in the Book of Moses, where the LORD commanded, “The fathers shall not die for the children, nor the children die for the fathers, but each shall be put to death for his own sin.”

Amaziah Defeats Edomites 5Amaziah assembled [the men of] Judah and appointed them in accordance with their fathers’ (ancestors’) households under commanders of thousands and of hundreds throughout Judah and Benjamin. He numbered them from twenty years old and above and found there to be 300,000 choice men fit for war and able to handle spear and shield. 6He also hired 100,000 brave warriors from Israel for a hundred talents of silver. 7But a man of God came to him, saying, “O king, do not let this army of Israel go with you, for the LORD is not with Israel nor with any of the sons of Ephraim. 8“But if you do go [in spite of this warning], be strong and courageous for battle; yet God will cause you to stumble and fall before the enemy, for God has power to help and to cause people to stumble.” 9Amaziah said to the man of God, “But what shall we do about the hundred talents which I gave to the troops of Israel?” The man of God answered, “The LORD is able to give you much more than this.” 10So Amaziah dismissed the troops that came to him from Ephraim, to go home. So their anger was kindled and burned greatly against Judah, and they returned home in the heat of anger.

11Now Amaziah took courage and led his people out to the Valley of Salt, and he struck down 10,000 of the men of Seir (Edom). 12The sons of Judah also captured 10,000 alive and brought them to the top of the cliff. They threw them down from the top of the cliff and they were all crushed to pieces. 13But the troops whom Amaziah sent back, those not allowed to go with him to battle, attacked and raided the cities of Judah, from Samaria to Beth-horon, and struck down 3,000 men and took a large amount of spoil.

Amaziah Rebuked for Idolatry 14After Amaziah came back from the slaughter of the Edomites, he brought the gods of the sons of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, bowed before them, and burned incense to them. 15So the anger of the LORD burned against Amaziah, and He sent him a prophet who said to him, “Why have you desired the gods of the people who did not save their own people from your hand?” 16As he was talking, the king said to him, “Have we made you the king’s counselor? Stop! Why should you be put to death?” Then the prophet stopped and said, “I know that God has decided to destroy you because you have done this and have ignored my advice.”

Amaziah Defeated by Joash of Israel 17Then Amaziah king of Judah took counsel and sent word to Joash the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come [to battle], let us face each other.” 18Then Joash king of Israel sent word to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, “The [little] thorn bush in Lebanon sent word to the [great] cedar in Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son in marriage.’ But a wild beast in Lebanon passed by and trampled down the thorn bush. 19“You say, ‘See, I have struck down and defeated Edom.’ Your heart lifts you up to boast [about your victory]. Now stay at home; why should you meddle and court disaster so that you, even you, will fall and Judah with you?”

20But Amaziah would not listen, for it was from God, so that He might hand Judah over to Joash because they had desired the gods of Edom. 21So Joash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah faced one another at Beth-shemesh, which belonged to Judah. 22And Judah was defeated by Israel, and they fled, every man to his tent. 23Then Joash king of Israel captured Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash the son of Jehoahaz (Ahaziah), at Beth-shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate, 400 cubits. 24He took all the gold and silver and all the utensils which were found in the house of God with [the doorkeeper] Obed-edom, and the treasures of the king’s house (palace), and the hostages, and returned to Samaria.

25And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived fifteen years after the death of Joash the son of Jehoahaz king of Israel. 26Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, from the first to the last, are they not written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel? 27Now from the time that Amaziah turned away from following the LORD, they conspired against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish; but they sent men after him to Lachish and killed him there. 28Then they brought him on horses and buried him with his fathers in the City of [David in] Judah.
2 Chronicles 26
Uzziah Succeeds Amaziah In Judah

1Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah. 2He built Eloth and restored it to Judah after the king [Amaziah] slept with his fathers [in death]. 3Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jechiliah of Jerusalem. 4He did right in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that his father Amaziah had done. 5He continued to seek God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding through the vision of God; and as long as he sought (inquired of, longing for) the LORD, God caused him to prosper.

Uzziah Succeeds in War 6He went out and made war against the Philistines, and broke through the wall of Gath, the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod; and he built cities near Ashdod and [elsewhere] among the Philistines. 7God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabs who lived in Gur-baal, and the Meunites. 8The Ammonites paid tribute (money) to Uzziah, and his fame spread abroad, even as far as the border of Egypt, for he became very strong. 9Uzziah also built towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate, the Valley Gate, and at the corner buttress [of the wall], and fortified them. 10He also built towers in the wilderness and dug many cisterns, for he had a great deal of livestock, both in the lowlands and in the plain. He also had farmers and vinedressers in the hill country and in the fertile fields, for he loved the soil. 11Moreover, Uzziah had an army ready for battle, which went into combat by divisions according to the number of their muster as recorded by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the official, under the direction of Hananiah, one of the king’s commanders. 12The total number of the heads of the fathers’ households, of valiant men, was 2,600. 13Under their command was an army of 307,500, who could wage war with great power, to help the king against the enemy. 14Moreover, Uzziah prepared shields, spears, helmets, body armor, bows, and sling stones for the entire army. 15In Jerusalem he made machines of war invented by skillful men to be put on the towers and on the [corner] battlements for the purpose of shooting arrows and large stones. And his fame spread far, for he was marvelously helped until he was strong.

Pride Is Uzziah’s Undoing 16But when Uzziah became strong, he became so proud [of himself and his accomplishments] that he acted corruptly, and he was unfaithful and sinned against the LORD his God, for he went into the temple of the LORD to burn incense on the altar of incense. 17Then Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him eighty priests of the LORD, men of courage. 18They opposed King Uzziah and said to him, “It is not for you, Uzziah, to burn incense to the LORD, but for the priests, the sons of Aaron who have been consecrated to burn incense. Get out of the sanctuary, for you have been unfaithful and will have no honor from the LORD God.” 19Then Uzziah, with a censer in his hand to burn incense, was enraged; and while he was enraged with the priests, leprosy broke out on his forehead before the priests in the house of the LORD, beside the incense altar. 20As Azariah the chief priest and all the priests looked toward him, behold, he was leprous on his forehead; and they hurried him out of there, and he also hurried to get out because the LORD had stricken him. 21King Uzziah was a leper to the day of his death; and, being a leper, he lived in a separate house, for he was excluded from the house of the LORD. And his son Jotham took charge of the king’s household, judging and governing the people of the land.

22Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, from the first to the last, Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, has written. 23So Uzziah slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him with his fathers in the burial field of the kings [outside the royal tombs], for they said, “He is a leper.” And his son Jotham became king in his place.

2 Chronicles 27
Jotham Succeeds Uzziah In Judah

1Jotham was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerushah the daughter of Zadok. 2He did right in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that his father Uzziah had done; however, he did not enter the temple of the LORD. But the people continued behaving corruptly. 3He built the upper gate of the house of the LORD, and did extensive building on the wall of Ophel. 4Moreover, he built cities in the hill country of Judah, and in the forests he built fortresses and towers. 5He also fought with the king of the Ammonites and prevailed over them. As a result the Ammonites gave him during that year a hundred talents of silver and ten thousand measures each of wheat and of barley. The Ammonites also paid him that much in the second year and third year. 6So Jotham grew powerful, because he directed his ways before the LORD his God. 7Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars and his ways, behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah. 8He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. 9And Jotham slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him in the City of David. Ahaz his son became king in his place.

2 Chronicles 28
Ahaz Succeeds Jotham In Judah

1Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do right in the sight of the LORD, as his father (forefather) David had done. 2Instead he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and even made cast images for the Baals. 3And he burned incense in the Valley of Ben-hinnom and burned his sons [as an offering], in accordance with the repulsive acts of the [pagan] nations whom the LORD had driven out before the sons (descendants) of Israel. 4He also sacrificed and burned incense on the high places [of pagan worship], on the hills and under every green tree.

Judah Is Invaded 5Therefore the LORD his God handed over Ahaz to the king of Aram (Syria), who defeated him and led away a great number [of the people] as captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also handed over to the king of Israel, who struck Judah with a great slaughter. 6For Pekah son of Remaliah killed 120,000 in Judah in one day, all courageous men, because they had abandoned (turned away from) the LORD God of their fathers. 7And Zichri, a warrior of Ephraim, killed Maaseiah the king’s son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah, who was second [in power] to the king.

8And the sons of Israel led away captive 200,000 of their kinsmen [of Judah]—women, sons, and daughters—and they also took a great quantity of spoil from them and brought it to Samaria. 9But a prophet of the LORD was there, whose name was Oded; and he went out to meet the army that was returning to Samaria and said to them, “Behold, because the LORD, the God of your fathers, was angry with Judah, He handed them over to you; but you have killed them in a rage that has reached as far as heaven. 10And now you intend to subjugate the people of Judah and Jerusalem as male and female slaves for yourselves. But are you yourselves not guilty of transgressions against the LORD your God? 11“Now therefore, hear me and return the captives whom you have captured from your brothers (fellow descendants of Israel, i.e. Jacob), for the burning anger of the LORD is against you.” 12Then some of the heads of the Ephraimites (Israel)—Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai—took a stand against those who were returning from the battle, 13and said to them, “You must not bring the captives in here; for we are guilty before the LORD already, and what you intend to do will add more to our sins and our guilt. For our guilt is so great that His burning anger is against Israel.” 14So the armed men [of Israel] left the captives and the spoil [of Judah] before the officers and all the assembly. 15Then the men who were designated by name rose up and took the captives, and from the spoil they clothed all those who were naked; they clothed them and gave them sandals, and fed them and gave them [something to] drink, anointed them [with oil, as was a host’s duty], and led all the feeble ones on donkeys, and they brought them to Jericho, the City of Palm Trees, to their brothers (fellow descendants of Israel, i.e. Jacob). Then they returned to Samaria.

Compromise with Assyria 16At that time King Ahaz sent word to the king of Assyria [to ask him] for help. 17For the Edomites had come again and attacked Judah and led away captives. 18The Philistines had also invaded the cities of the low country and of the Negev (the South country) of Judah, and had taken Beth-shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, and Soco with their villages, and also Timnah with its villages, and Gimzo with its villages, and they settled there. 19For the LORD humbled Judah because of Ahaz king of Israel, for Ahaz had allowed unrestrained and undisciplined behavior in Judah and had been very unfaithful to the LORD. 20So Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria came against him and harassed him instead of strengthening and supporting him. 21Although Ahaz took a portion [of treasure] from the house of the LORD and from the house (palace) of the king and from the leaders, and gave it [as tribute] to the king of Assyria, it did not help Ahaz.

22In the time of his distress, this same King Ahaz became yet more unfaithful to the LORD. 23For he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, which had defeated him, and he said, “Since the gods of the kings of Aram (Syria) helped them, I will sacrifice to them so that they may help me.” But they became the ruin and downfall of him and all of Israel. 24Then Ahaz collected the utensils of the house of God and he cut them in pieces; and he shut the doors of the house of the LORD and made altars for himself in every corner of Jerusalem. 25In every city of Judah he made high places to burn incense to other gods, provoking to anger the LORD, the God of his fathers. 26Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, from the first to the last, behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. 27And Ahaz slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him in the city, in Jerusalem, but they did not bring him into the tombs of the kings of Israel. And his son Hezekiah reigned in his place.

2 Chronicles 29
Hezekiah Succeeds Ahaz In Judah

1Hezekiah became king when he was twenty-five years old, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abijah the daughter of Zechariah. 2He did right in the sight of the LORD, in accordance with everything that David his father (forefather) had done.

3In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of the house of the LORD [which his father had closed] and repaired them [and replaced the gold overlay]. 4He brought in the priests and Levites and gathered them into the square on the east. Reforms Begun 5Then he said to them, “Levites, listen to me! Now consecrate (dedicate) yourselves and consecrate the house of the LORD, the God of your fathers, and get the filth [of idol worship] out of the Holy Place. 6For our fathers have been unfaithful and have done evil in the sight of the LORD our God, and they have abandoned Him and have turned their faces away from the dwelling place of the LORD, and have turned their backs [toward Him]. 7They have also closed the doors of the [temple] porch and put out the lamps, and they have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the Holy Place to the God of Israel. 8Therefore the wrath of the LORD has been against Judah and Jerusalem, and He has made them an object of terror, of horror, and of hissing, just as you see with your own eyes. 9For behold, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity because of this. 10Now it is in my heart to make a covenant (solemn agreement) with the LORD God of Israel, so that His burning anger will turn away from us. 11“My sons, do not be negligent and careless now, for the LORD has chosen you to stand in His presence, to attend to His service, and to be His ministers and burn incense.”

12Then the Levites arose: Mahath the son of Amasai and Joel the son of Azariah, from the sons of the Kohathites; from the sons of Merari: Kish the son of Abdi, Azariah the son of Jehallelel; from the Gershonites: Joah the son of Zimmah and Eden the son of Joah; 13from the sons of Elizaphan: Shimri and Jeiel; from the sons of Asaph: Zechariah, and Mattaniah; 14from the sons of Heman: Jehiel and Shimei; and from the sons of Jeduthun: Shemaiah and Uzziel. 15They gathered their brothers (fellow Levites) together, consecrated themselves, and went in to cleanse the house of the LORD, as the king had commanded by the words of the LORD. 16The priests went into the inner part of the house of the LORD to cleanse it, and every unclean thing they found in the temple of the LORD they brought out to the courtyard of the LORD’S house. Then the Levites received it to take out to the Kidron Valley [for disposal]. 17Now they began the consecration on the first [day] of the first month, and on the eighth day of the month they came to the porch of the LORD. Then for eight days they consecrated the house of the LORD, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they finished. 18Then they went inside to King Hezekiah and said, “We have cleansed the entire house (temple) of the LORD, the altar of burnt offering with all of its utensils, and the table of showbread with all its utensils. 19“Moreover, we have prepared and consecrated all the utensils which King Ahaz had discarded during his reign in his unfaithfulness; and behold, they are in front of the altar of the LORD.”

Hezekiah Restores Temple Worship 20Then King Hezekiah arose early and assembled the officials of the city, and went up to the house of the LORD. 21They brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven male goats for a sin offering for the kingdom, the sanctuary, and Judah. He commanded the priests, the sons of Aaron, to offer them on the altar of the LORD. 22So they slaughtered the bulls, and the priests took the blood and sprinkled it on the altar. They also slaughtered the rams and sprinkled the blood on the altar; then they slaughtered the lambs and sprinkled the blood on the altar. 23Then they brought the male goats for the sin offering before the king and the assembly, and they laid their hands on them [to symbolize the transference of their sin]. 24The priests slaughtered them and cleansed the altar from sin with their blood to atone for all Israel, because the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering be made for all Israel.

25Hezekiah stationed the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals, with harps, and with lyres, in accordance with the command of David [his ancestor] and of Gad the king’s seer, and of Nathan the prophet; for the command was from the LORD through His prophets. 26The Levites stood with the musical instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets. 27Then Hezekiah gave the order to offer the burnt offering on the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song to the LORD also began with the trumpets accompanied by the instruments of David, king of Israel. 28The entire congregation worshiped, the singers also sang, and the trumpets sounded; all this continued until the burnt offering was finished.

29When the burnt offerings were completed, the king and all who were present with him bowed down and worshiped [God]. 30Also King Hezekiah and the officials ordered the Levites to exclaim praises to the LORD with the words of David and of Asaph the seer. And they exclaimed praises with joy, and bowed down and worshiped.

31Then Hezekiah said, “Now you have consecrated yourselves to the LORD; approach and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of the LORD.” And the assembly brought in sacrifices and thank offerings, and all those who were willing brought burnt offerings. 32The number of the burnt offerings which the assembly brought was 70 bulls, 100 rams, and 200 lambs. All these were for a burnt offering to the LORD. 33The consecrated things were 600 bulls and 3,000 sheep. 34But there were too few priests and they were unable to skin all the burnt offerings; so until the other priests had consecrated themselves, their brothers, the Levites, helped them until the work was done. For the Levites were more upright in heart and more conscientious than the priests in consecrating themselves. 35There were also many burnt offerings with the fat of the peace offerings and with the drink offerings for the burnt offerings. So the service of the house of the LORD was established again. 36Then Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of what God had prepared for the people, for the thing came about suddenly.

2 Chronicles 30
All Israel Invited To The Passover

1Hezekiah sent word to all Israel and to Judah and also wrote letters to Ephraim and Manasseh to come to the house of the LORD at Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover Feast to the LORD God of Israel. 2For the king and his officials and all the assembly in Jerusalem had decided to celebrate the Passover in the second month, 3since they could not celebrate it at that time because a sufficient number of priests had not consecrated themselves, nor had the people assembled at Jerusalem. 4Thus the [decision to set a] new time pleased the king and the entire assembly. 5So they decided to circulate a proclamation throughout Israel, from Beersheba to Dan, that the people were to come to celebrate the Passover to the LORD God of Israel, at Jerusalem. For they had not celebrated it in great numbers as it was prescribed [for a long time]. 6So the runners went throughout Israel and Judah with the letters from the hand of the king and his officials, in accordance with the command of the king, saying, “O sons (descendants) of Israel, return to the LORD God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel (Jacob), so that He will return to those of you who escaped and are left from the hand (power) of the kings of Assyria. 7Do not be like your fathers and your brothers, who were unfaithful to the LORD God of their fathers, so that He made them a horror (lifeless, desolate), just as you see. 8Now do not stiffen your neck [becoming obstinate] like your fathers, but yield to the LORD and come to His sanctuary which He has sanctified and set apart forever, and serve the LORD your God, so that His burning anger will turn away from you. 9“For if you return to the LORD, your brothers (relatives) and your children will find compassion in the presence of those who led them away captive and will return to this land. For the LORD your God is gracious and merciful, and He will not turn His face away from you if you return to Him.”

10So the runners (couriers) passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh, as far as Zebulun; but the people laughed at them with scorn and mocked them. 11Yet some of the men of Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. 12Also the hand of God was on Judah to give them one heart to do that which the king and the officials had commanded by the word of the LORD.

Passover Reinstituted 13Now many people were gathered at Jerusalem to celebrate the Feast of Unleavened Bread in the second month; it was a very large assembly. 14They took action and removed the [pagan] altars which were in Jerusalem; they also removed all the incense altars and threw them into the Brook Kidron [the dumping place for the ashes of such repulsive things]. 15Then they slaughtered the Passover lambs on the fourteenth day of the second month. And the priests and the Levites were ashamed of themselves, and consecrated themselves and brought burnt offerings to the house of the LORD. 16They stood at their accustomed stations, in accordance with the Law of Moses, the man of God. The priests sprinkled the blood [which they received] from the hand of the Levites [on the altar]. 17For there were many in the assembly who had not consecrated themselves [that is, become ceremonially clean and free from all sin]; so the Levites had to slaughter the Passover lambs for everyone who was not clean, in order to make them holy for the LORD. 18For the majority of the people, many from Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not purified themselves, and yet they ate the Passover contrary to what had been prescribed. For Hezekiah had prayed for them, saying, “May the good LORD pardon 19everyone who sets his heart to seek God—the LORD God of his fathers—even though it is not in accordance with the [ceremonial] purification [rules] of the sanctuary.” 20So the LORD listened to Hezekiah and healed the people [of their uncleanness]. 21The Israelites who were present in Jerusalem celebrated the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days with great joy. The Levites and priests praised the LORD day after day, singing to the LORD with loud instruments. 22Hezekiah spoke encouragingly to all the Levites who showed good understanding in the things of the LORD. So the people ate for the appointed seven days, sacrificing peace offerings and giving thanks to the LORD God of their fathers.

23Then the whole assembly decided to celebrate [the feast] for another seven days; and they celebrated it another seven days with joy. 24For Hezekiah king of Judah gave to the assembly 1,000 bulls and 7,000 sheep, and the officials gave the assembly 1,000 bulls and 10,000 sheep. And a large number of priests consecrated themselves [for service]. 25All the assembly of Judah rejoiced, with the priests and the Levites and all the assembly that came from Israel, both the sojourners (resident aliens, foreigners) who came from the land of Israel and those living in Judah. 26So there was great joy in Jerusalem, because there had been nothing like this in Jerusalem since the time of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel. 27Then the priests and Levites stood and blessed the people; and their voice was heard and their prayer came up to His holy dwelling place, to heaven.

2 Chronicles 31
Idols Are Destroyed

1Now when all of this was finished, all Israel who were present went out to the cities of Judah, and smashed the [pagan] pillars (obelisks, memorial stones) in pieces, cut down the Asherim (wooden symbols of a female deity), and tore down the high places and the altars [of idolatry] throughout all Judah and Benjamin, as well as in Ephraim and Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the sons (descendants) of Israel returned to their own cities, each to his own property.

2And Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests, and the Levites by their divisions, each in accordance with his service, both the priests and Levites, for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister and to give thanks and to praise in the gates of the camp of the LORD. Reforms Continued 3Hezekiah also appointed the king’s [personal] portion of his goods: for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths and for the New Moons and for the appointed feasts, as it is written in the Law of the LORD. 4He also told (ordered) the people living in Jerusalem to give the portion that was due to the priests and Levites, so that they might [be free to] devote themselves to the Law of the LORD. 5As soon as the king’s order spread, the Israelites gave in abundance the first fruits of grain, new wine, [olive] oil, honey, and of all the produce of the field; and they brought in the tithe of everything abundantly. 6The sons of Israel and Judah who lived in the cities of Judah also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of sacred gifts which were consecrated to the LORD their God, and placed them in heaps. 7In the third month [at the end of wheat harvest] they began to make the heaps, and they finished them in the seventh month. 8When Hezekiah and the rulers came and saw the heaps, they blessed the LORD and His people Israel. 9Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and Levites about the heaps. 10Azariah the high priest of the house of Zadok answered him, “Since the people began to bring the offerings into the house of the LORD, we have had enough to eat with plenty left over, for the LORD has blessed His people, and this great quantity is left over.”

11Then Hezekiah told them to prepare rooms [for storage] in the house of the LORD, and they prepared them. 12They faithfully brought in the contributions, the tithes, and the sacred (dedicated) things. Conaniah the Levite was in charge of them, and Shimei his brother was second [in authority]. 13Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth, Jozabad, Eliel, Ismachiah, Mahath, and Benaiah were overseers directed by Conaniah and Shimei his brother by the appointment of King Hezekiah, and Azariah was the chief officer of the house of God. 14Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, keeper of the East Gate, was in charge of the voluntary offerings to God, to apportion the contributions for the LORD and the most holy things. 15Under his authority were Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah in the cities of the priests, to distribute faithfully their portions to their brothers (relatives) by divisions, whether great or small, 16without regard to their genealogical registration, to the males from thirty years old and upward—everyone who entered the house of the LORD for his daily obligations—for their service in accordance with their duties by their divisions; 17as well as the priests who were registered genealogically according to their fathers’ households, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, by their duties and by their divisions. 18The genealogical registration included all their little children, their wives, and their sons and daughters, for the whole assembly, because they consecrated themselves faithfully in holiness. 19Also for the sons of Aaron, the priests, who were in the pasture lands of their cities or in each and every city, there were men who were designated by name to give portions to every male among the priests and to everyone genealogically registered among the Levites.

20This is what Hezekiah did throughout Judah; and he did what was good, right, and true before the LORD his God. 21Every work which he began in the service of the house of God in keeping with the law and the commandment, seeking and inquiring of his God [and longing for Him], he did with all his heart and prospered.

2 Chronicles 32
Sennacherib Invades Judah

1After these things and this faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came and invaded Judah and besieged the fortified cities, intending to take them for himself. 2When Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib had come and that he intended to go to war against Jerusalem, 3he decided, together with his officers and his soldiers, to stop up the water [supply] from the springs which were outside the city [by enclosing them with masonry and concealing them], and they helped him. 4So many people came together, and they stopped up all the springs and the brook which flowed [underground] through the region, saying, “Why should the kings of Assyria come and find an abundance of water?” 5Also Hezekiah resolutely set to work and rebuilt all the wall that had been broken down, and erected towers on it, and he built another wall outside and strengthened the Millo (fortification) in the City of David, and made a great number of weapons and shields. 6He also appointed military officers over the people and gathered them to him in the square at the city gate, and spoke encouragingly to them, saying, 7“Be strong and courageous. Do not fear or be dismayed because of the king of Assyria, nor because of all the army that is with him; for the One with us is greater than the one with him. 8“With him there is only an arm of flesh, but with us is the LORD our God to help us and to fight our battles.” And the people relied on the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.

Sennacherib Undermines Hezekiah 9After this, Sennacherib king of Assyria, while he was at Lachish [besieging it] with all his forces, sent his servants to Jerusalem, to Hezekiah king of Judah, and to all Judah who were at Jerusalem, saying, 10“Thus says Sennacherib king of Assyria, ‘In what do you trust that you are remaining in Jerusalem under siege? 11‘Is not Hezekiah misleading you in order to let you die by famine and thirst, while saying, “The LORD our God will rescue us from the hand of the king of Assyria?” 12‘Has the same Hezekiah not taken away his [Baal’s] high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, “You shall worship before [only] one altar and burn incense on it”? 13‘Do you not know what I and my fathers (ancestors) have done to all the peoples of the [other] lands? Were the gods of the nations of those lands able to rescue their lands from my hand at all? 14‘Who [was there] among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly destroyed who was able to rescue his people from my hand, that your God should be able to rescue you from my hand? 15‘So now, do not let Hezekiah deceive or mislead you like this, and do not believe him, for no god of any nation or kingdom has been able to rescue his people from my hand or the hand of my fathers. How much less will your God rescue you from my hand!’”

16And his servants said even more against the LORD God and against His servant Hezekiah. 17The Assyrian king also wrote letters insulting and taunting the LORD God of Israel, and speaking against Him, saying, “As the gods of the nations of other lands have not rescued their people from my hand, so the God of Hezekiah will not rescue His people from my hand.” 18They shouted it loudly in the language of Judah to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten and terrify them, so that they might take the city [without a long siege]. 19They spoke of the God of Jerusalem as [they spoke of] the gods of the peoples of the earth, [which are only] the work of the hands of men.

Hezekiah’s Prayer Is Answered 20But Hezekiah the king and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz prayed about this and cried out to heaven [for help]. 21And the LORD sent an angel who destroyed every brave warrior, commander, and officer in the camp of the king of Assyria. So the king returned to his own land in shame. And when he entered the house (temple) of his god, some of his own children killed him there with the sword. 22Thus the LORD saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria and from the hand of all others, and He gave them rest on every side. 23And many brought gifts to the LORD at Jerusalem and valuable presents to Hezekiah king of Judah; so from then on he was exalted in the sight of all nations.

24In those days Hezekiah became terminally ill; and he prayed to the LORD, and He answered him and gave him a [miraculous] sign. 25But Hezekiah did nothing [for the LORD] in return for the benefit bestowed on him, because his heart had become proud; therefore God’s wrath came on him and on Judah and Jerusalem. 26However, Hezekiah humbled his proud heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the LORD did not come on them during the days of Hezekiah.

27Now Hezekiah had immense wealth and honor; and he made for himself treasuries for silver, gold, precious stones, spices, shields, and all kinds of delightful articles, 28and storehouses for the produce of grain, new wine, and [olive] oil, and stalls for all kinds of cattle, and sheepfolds for the flocks. 29Moreover, he made cities for himself and acquired an abundance of flocks and herds, for God gave him very many possessions. 30This same Hezekiah also stopped up the upper outlet of the waters of Gihon and channeled them down to the west side of the City of David. Hezekiah succeeded in everything that he did. 31And so in the matter of the envoys of the rulers of Babylon, who were sent to him to inquire about the wonder that had happened in the land, God left him alone only to test him, in order to know everything that was in his heart.

32Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and his godly achievements, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel. 33So Hezekiah slept with his fathers [in death] and they buried him in the upper section of the tombs of the descendants of David; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. And his son Manasseh became king in his place.

2 Chronicles 33
Manasseh Succeeds Hezekiah In Judah

1Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned for fifty-five years in Jerusalem. 2But he did evil in the sight of the LORD, like the repulsive acts of the [pagan] nations whom the LORD dispossessed before the sons (descendants) of Israel. 3For he rebuilt the [idolatrous] high places which his father Hezekiah had torn down; and he set up altars for the Baals and made the Asherim, and worshiped all the host of heaven [the sun, the moon, stars and planets] and served them. 4He built [pagan] altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD had said, “My Name shall be in Jerusalem forever.” 5He built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD. 6He made his sons pass through the fire [as an offering to his gods] in the Valley of Ben-hinnom; and he practiced witchcraft, used divination, and practiced sorcery, and dealt with mediums and spiritists. He did much evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger. 7Then he set the carved image of the idol which he had made in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, “In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen from all the tribes of Israel, I will put My Name [and the symbol of my Presence] forever; 8and I will not again remove Israel from the land which I appointed for your fathers, if they will only be careful to do everything that I have commanded them in regard to all the law, the statutes, and the ordinances given through Moses.” 9So Manasseh caused Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to sin, by doing more evil than the [pagan] nations whom the LORD had destroyed before the sons of Israel.

Manasseh’s Idolatry Rebuked 10Now the LORD spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they paid no attention. 11So the LORD brought the commanders of the army of the king of Assyria against them, and they captured Manasseh with hooks [through his nose or cheeks] and bound him with bronze [chains] and took him to Babylon. 12But when he was in distress, he sought the LORD his God and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. 13When he prayed to Him, He was moved by his entreaty and heard his pleading, and brought him back to Jerusalem to his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the LORD is God.

14After this he built an outer wall for the City of David on the west side of Gihon, in the river valley, to the entrance of the Fish Gate; and he encircled the Ophel with it and made it very high. Then he put military commanders in all the fortified cities of Judah. 15He also removed the foreign gods and the idol from the house of the LORD, as well as all the altars which he had built on the mountain of the house of the LORD and in Jerusalem; and he threw them outside the city. 16Then he set up the altar of the LORD and sacrificed peace offerings and thank offerings on it; and he ordered Judah to serve the LORD God of Israel. 17Yet the people still sacrificed on the high places, but only to the LORD their God.

18Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of the LORD God of Israel, behold, they are among the records of the kings of Israel. 19His prayer also and how God heard him, and all his sin, his unfaithfulness, and the sites on which he built high places and set up the Asherim and the carved images, before he humbled himself, behold, they are written in the records of the Hozai. 20So Manasseh slept with his fathers [in death], and they buried him in [the garden of] his own house. And his son Amon became king in his place.

Amon Becomes King in Judah 21Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned for two years in Jerusalem. 22But he did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as his father Manasseh had done. Amon sacrificed to all the carved images which his father Manasseh had made, and he served them. 23Further, he did not humble himself before the LORD as his father Manasseh [finally] had done, but Amon multiplied his guilt and his sin. 24And his servants conspired against him and killed him in his own house (palace). 25But the people of the land struck down all those who had conspired against King Amon, and they made his son Josiah king in his place.

2 Chronicles 34
Josiah Succeeds Amon In Judah

1Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned for thirty-one years in Jerusalem. 2He did what was right in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father (forefather) and did not turn aside either to the right or to the left. 3For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was still young (sixteen), he began to seek after and inquire of the God of his father David; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem of the high places, the Asherim, and the carved and cast images. 4They tore down the altars of the Baals in his presence; he cut to pieces the incense altars that were high above them; he also smashed the Asherim and the carved images and the cast images to pieces, and ground them to dust and scattered it on the graves of those who had sacrificed to them. 5Then Josiah burned the bones of the [pagan] priests on their altars and purged and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem. 6In the cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, Simeon, and as far as Naphtali, in their surrounding ruins, 7he tore down the altars and beat and crushed the Asherim and the carved images into powder, and cut to pieces all the incense altars throughout the land of Israel. Then he returned to Jerusalem.

Josiah Repairs the Temple 8In the eighteenth year of Josiah’s reign, when he had purged the land and the [LORD’S] house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder (secretary), to repair the house of the LORD his God. 9When they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the money that had been brought into the house of God, which the Levites, who guarded the doors, had collected from Manasseh and Ephraim, and from all the remnant of Israel, and from all Judah and Benjamin, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 10Then they gave it to the workmen who were appointed over the house of the LORD, and the workmen who were working in the house of the LORD gave it [to others] to repair and restore the house (temple). 11They in turn gave it to the carpenters and builders to buy quarried stone and timber for couplings (trusses, braces) and to make beams for the houses which the kings of Judah had let go to ruin. 12The men did the work faithfully with foremen over them to supervise and inspect [their work]: Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites of the sons of Merari, and Zechariah and Meshullam of the sons of the Kohathites, and the Levites, all who were skillful with musical instruments. 13They were also in charge of the burden bearers [who carried heavy loads], and supervised all the workmen in any kind of service; and some of the Levites were scribes and officials and gatekeepers.

Hilkiah Discovers Lost Book of the Law 14When they were bringing out the money which had been brought into the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found the Book of the Law of the LORD given by Moses. 15Hilkiah told Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Law in the house of the LORD.” And he gave the book to Shaphan. 16Shaphan brought the book to the king, but [first] reported further to him, “Your servants are doing everything that was entrusted to them. 17“They have emptied out the money that was found in the house of the LORD, and have delivered it into the hands of the overseers and the workmen.” 18Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a book.” And Shaphan read from it in the presence of the king.

19When the king heard the words of the Law, he tore his clothes. 20Then the king commanded Hilkiah, Ahikam the son of Shaphan, Abdon the son of Micah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king, saying, 21“Go, inquire of the LORD for me and for those who are left in Israel and in Judah in regard to the words of the book which has been found; for great is the wrath of the LORD which has been poured out on us because our fathers have not kept and obeyed the word of the LORD, to act in accordance with everything that is written in this book.”

Huldah, the Prophetess, Speaks 22So Hilkiah and those whom the king had told went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe (now she lived in Jerusalem, in the Second Quarter); and they spoke to her about this. 23And she answered them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: ‘Tell the man who sent you to me, 24thus says the LORD: “Behold, I am bringing evil on this place and on its inhabitants, all the curses that are written in the book which they have read in the presence of the king of Judah. 25“Because they have abandoned (rejected) Me and have burned incense to other gods, in order to provoke Me to anger with all the works of their hands, My wrath will be poured out on this place and it will not be extinguished.”’ 26But you shall say the following to King Josiah of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the LORD: ‘Thus says the LORD God of Israel, concerning the words which you have heard, 27“Because your heart was gentle and penitent and you humbled yourself before God when you heard His words against this place and its inhabitants, and humbled yourself before Me, and tore your clothes and wept before Me, I also have heard you,” declares the LORD. 28“Behold, I will gather you to your fathers [in death], and you shall be gathered to your grave in peace, and your eyes shall not see all the evil which I am going to bring on this place and on its inhabitants.”’” So they brought back word to the king.

29Then the king sent word and gathered all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem. 30And the king went up to the house of the LORD with all the men of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests, the Levites, and all the people, from the greatest to the least; and he read aloud so they could hear all the words of the Book of the Covenant which was found in the house of the LORD. Josiah’s Good Reign 31Then the king stood in his place and made a covenant before the LORD—to walk after (obey) the LORD, and to keep His commandments, His testimonies, and His statutes with all his heart and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant written in this book. 32Further, he made all who were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin stand [with him, in confirmation of it]. So the inhabitants of Jerusalem acted in accordance with the covenant of God, the God of their fathers. 33Josiah removed all the [pagan] repulsive things from all the lands belonging to the sons (descendants) of Israel, and made all who were present in Israel serve the LORD their God. Throughout his lifetime they did not turn from following the LORD God of their fathers.

2 Chronicles 35
The Passover Observed Again

1Josiah celebrated the Passover to the LORD in Jerusalem; they slaughtered the Passover lambs on the fourteenth day of the first month. 2He appointed the priests to their positions and encouraged them in the service of the house of the LORD. 3To the Levites who taught all Israel and were holy to the LORD he said, “Put the holy ark in the house (temple) which Solomon the son of David king of Israel built; it shall not be a burden [carried] on your shoulders any longer. Now serve the LORD your God and His people Israel. 4Prepare yourselves according to your fathers’ (ancestors’) households by your divisions, in accordance with the instructions of David king of Israel, and the instructions of his son Solomon. 5And stand in the holy place [of the priests] according to the sections of the fathers’ households of your fellow kinsmen the lay people, and according to the Levites, by division of [the families of] a father’s household. 6“Slaughter the Passover lambs and consecrate yourselves, and prepare for your fellow countrymen to carry out (obey) the word of the LORD given by Moses.”

7Then Josiah contributed to the lay people, to all who were present, flocks of lambs and young goats numbering 30,000, all as Passover offerings, and 3,000 bulls—these were from the king’s property. 8His officers also contributed a voluntary offering to the people, the priests and the Levites. Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, the officials of the house of God, gave to the priests for the Passover offerings 2,600 from the flocks [of lambs and young goats], and 300 bulls. 9Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanel, his brothers, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, officers of the Levites, contributed to the Levites for the Passover offerings 5,000 from the flocks [of lambs and young goats], and 500 bulls.

10When the service was ready, the priests stood in their [assigned] places and the Levites by their divisions, in accordance with the king’s command. 11They slaughtered the Passover lambs, and while the priests sprinkled the blood received from their hand, the Levites skinned the animals. 12Then they removed the burnt offerings, to distribute them to the sections of the fathers’ households of the lay people to offer to the LORD, as it is written in the Book of Moses. They did the same with the bulls. 13So they roasted the Passover lambs on the fire according to the ordinance; and they cooked the holy offerings in pots, in kettles, and in pans, and quickly brought them to all the lay people. 14Afterward the Levites prepared for themselves and for the priests, because the priests, the sons of Aaron, were busy offering the burnt offerings and the fat until night; so the Levites prepared for themselves and for the priests, the sons of Aaron. 15The singers, the sons of Asaph, were also in their places in accordance with the command of David, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s seer; and the gatekeepers at each gate did not need to leave their service, because their kinsmen the Levites prepared for them.

16So all the service of the LORD was prepared on that day to celebrate the Passover, and to offer burnt offerings on the altar of the LORD, in accordance with the command of King Josiah. 17Thus the sons of Israel who were present celebrated the Passover at that time, and the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days. 18No Passover like it had been celebrated in Israel since the days of Samuel the prophet; nor had any of the kings of Israel celebrated such a Passover as Josiah did with the priests, the Levites, all Judah and Israel who were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 19In the eighteenth year of Josiah’s reign this Passover was celebrated.

Josiah Dies in Battle 20After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Neco king of Egypt came up to make war at Carchemish on the Euphrates, and Josiah went out to meet him. 21But Neco sent messengers to Josiah, saying, “What business do we have with each other, O King of Judah? I am not coming against you today, but against the house with which I am at war, and God has ordered me to hurry. Stop for your own sake from interfering with God who is with me, so that He will not destroy you.” 22Yet Josiah would not turn away from him, but disguised himself in order to fight against him. He did not listen to the words of Neco from the mouth of God, but came to fight against him on the plain of Megiddo. 23The archers shot King Josiah, and the king said to his servants, “Take me away, for I am badly wounded.” 24So his servants took him out of the chariot and carried him in the second chariot which he had, and brought him to Jerusalem where he died and was buried in the tombs of his fathers. All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 25Then Jeremiah sung a lament (funeral song) for Josiah, and all the male and female singers have spoken about Josiah in their laments to this day. They made the songs an ordinance in Israel; behold, they are written in the Lamentations. 26Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and his deeds of devotion and godly achievements as written in the Law of the LORD, 27and his acts, from the first to the last, behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.

2 Chronicles 36
Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Then Jehoiachin Rule

1Then the people of the land took Joahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in Jerusalem in place of his father. 2Joahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned [only] three months in Jerusalem. 3Then the king of Egypt deposed him at Jerusalem, and imposed a fine on the land of a hundred talents of silver and one talent of gold. 4The king of Egypt made Eliakim, the brother of Joahaz, king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. But Neco took Joahaz his brother, and brought him to Egypt.

5Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem; and he did evil in the sight of the LORD his God. 6Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against him and bound him with bronze [chains] to take him to Babylon. 7Nebuchadnezzar also brought some of the articles of the house (temple) of the LORD to Babylon and put them in his temple there. 8Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim and the repulsive acts which he committed, and what was found against him, behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah. And his son Jehoiachin became king in his place.

9Jehoiachin was eight[teen] years old when he became king, and he reigned for three months and ten days in Jerusalem, and he did evil in the sight of the LORD. Captivity in Babylon Begun 10Now at the turn of the year [in the spring], King Nebuchadnezzar sent word and had him brought to Babylon with the valuable articles of the house of the LORD, and made his brother Zedekiah king over Judah and Jerusalem.

Zedekiah Rules in Judah 11Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned for eleven years in Jerusalem. 12He did evil in the sight of the LORD his God; he did not humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet, who spoke for the LORD. 13He also rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar who had made him swear allegiance by God. He stiffened his neck and hardened his heart against turning to the LORD God of Israel. 14Also, all the officials of the priests and the people were very unfaithful, following all the repulsive acts of the [pagan] nations; and they defiled the house of the LORD which He had sanctified in Jerusalem.

15The LORD, the God of their fathers, sent word to them again and again by His messengers, because He had compassion on His people and on His dwelling place. 16But they kept mocking the messengers of God and despising His words and scoffing at His prophets until the wrath of the LORD arose against His people, until there was no remedy or healing. 17Therefore He brought the king of the Chaldeans against them, who killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion on young man or virgin, old man or infirm; He gave them all into his hand. 18And as for all the articles of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king and of his officials, he brought them all to Babylon. 19Then they burned the house of God and tore down the wall of Jerusalem, and burned all its fortified buildings with fire, and destroyed all its valuable articles. 20He deported to Babylon those who had escaped from the sword; and they were servants to him and to his sons until the kingdom of Persia was established there, 21to fulfill the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had restored its Sabbaths; for as long as the land lay desolate it kept Sabbath until seventy years were complete.

Cyrus Permits Return 22Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia—in order to fulfill the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah—the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he sent a proclamation throughout his kingdom, and also put it in writing, saying, 23“Thus says Cyrus king of Persia: ‘The LORD, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and He has appointed me to build Him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all His people, may the LORD his God be with him, and let him go up [to Jerusalem]!’”

Ezra 1
Proclamation Of Cyrus
1Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia [that is, the first year he ruled Babylon], in order to fulfill the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah [the prophet], the LORD stirred up (put in motion) the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he sent a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and also put it in writing, saying:
2“Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, ‘The LORD, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth and He has appointed me to build Him a house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 3‘Whoever there is among you of all His people, may his God be with him! Let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah and rebuild the house of the LORD, the God of Israel; He is God who is in Jerusalem. 4‘In any place where a survivor (Jewish exile) may live, let the men (Gentiles) of that place support him with silver and gold, with goods and cattle, together with freewill offerings for the house of God in Jerusalem.’”
Holy Articles Restored 5Then the heads of the fathers’ households of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests and Levites, all those whose spirits God had stirred up, arose to go up and rebuild the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem. 6All those who were around them encouraged them with articles of silver, with gold, with goods, with cattle, and with valuable things, in addition to all that was given as a freewill offering. 7Also King Cyrus brought out the articles of the house of the LORD, which Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem [when he captured that city] and had put in the house of his gods. 8And Cyrus, king of Persia, had Mithredath the treasurer bring them out, and he counted them out to Sheshbazzar, the governor (leader) of Judah. 9And they counted: 30 dishes (basins) of gold, 1,000 dishes of silver, 29 duplicates; 1030 [small] gold bowls, 410 [small] silver bowls of a second kind, and 1,000 other articles. 11All the articles of gold and of silver totaled 5,400. All these Sheshbazzar [the governor] brought up with the exiles who went from Babylon up to Jerusalem.

Ezra 2
Number Of Those Returning
1Now these are the people of the province [of Judah] who came up from the captivity of the exiles, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had deported to Babylon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city. 2These came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah.

The number of the men of the people of Israel: 3the sons (descendants) of Parosh, 2,172; 4the sons of Shephatiah, 372; 5the sons of Arah, 775; 6the sons of Pahath-moab of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, 2,812; 7the sons of Elam, 1,254; 8the sons of Zattu, 945; 9the sons of Zaccai, 760; 10the sons of Bani, 642; 11the sons of Bebai, 623; 12the sons of Azgad, 1,222; 13the sons of Adonikam, 666; 14the sons of Bigvai, 2,056; 15the sons of Adin, 454; 16the sons of Ater of Hezekiah, 98; 17the sons of Bezai, 323; 18the sons of Jorah, 112; 19the sons of Hashum, 223; 20the sons of Gibbar, 95; 21the men of Bethlehem, 123; 22the men of Netophah, 56; 23the men of Anathoth, 128; 24the sons of Azmaveth, 42; 25the sons of Kiriath-arim, Chephirah and Beeroth, 743; 26the sons of Ramah and Geba, 621; 27the men of Michmas, 122; 28the men of Bethel and Ai, 223; 29the sons of Nebo, 52; 30the sons of Magbish, 156; 31the sons of the other Elam, 1,254; 32the sons of Harim, 320; 33the sons of Lod, Hadid and Ono, 725; 34the men of Jericho, 345; 35the sons of Senaah, 3,630.
Priests Returning 36The priests: the sons of Jedaiah of the house of Jeshua, 973; 37the sons of Immer, 1,052; 38the sons of Pashhur, 1,247; 39the sons of Harim, 1,017.
Levites Returning 40The Levites: the sons of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodaviah, 74. 41The singers: the sons of Asaph, 128. 42The sons of the gatekeepers: of Shallum, Ater, Talmon, Akkub, Hatita, and Shobai, in all 139.
43The temple servants: the sons of Ziha, Hasupha, Tabbaoth, 44the sons of Keros, Siaha, Padon, 45the sons of Lebanah, Hagabah, Akkub, 46the sons of Hagab, Shalmai, Hanan, 47the sons of Giddel, Gahar, Reaiah, 48the sons of Rezin, Nekoda, Gazzam, 49the sons of Uzza, Paseah, Besai, 50the sons of Asnah, Meunim, Nephisim, 51the sons of Bakbuk, Hakupha, Harhur, 52the sons of Bazluth, Mehida, Harsha, 53the sons of Barkos, Sisera, Temah, 54the sons of Neziah, Hatipha.
55The sons of [King] Solomon’s servants: the sons of Sotai, Hassophereth (Sophereth), Peruda, 56the sons of Jaalah, Darkon, Giddel, 57the sons of Shephatiah, Hattil, Pochereth-hazzebaim, Ami.
58All the temple servants and the sons of Solomon’s servants totaled 392.
59Now these are the ones who came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addan, and Immer, but they could not provide evidence of their fathers’ households and their descendants, whether they were of Israel: 60the sons of Delaiah, Tobiah, and Nekoda, 652. Priests Removed 61Of the sons of the priests: the sons of Hobaiah, of Hakkoz, and of Barzillai, who took a wife from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and he was known by their name. 62These searched [for their names] among those registered in the genealogies, but they were not found; so they were excluded from the priesthood as [ceremonially] unclean. 63The governor told them that they should not eat of the most holy things [the priests’ food] until a priest stood up with Urim and Thummim [who by consulting these articles in his breastplate could determine God’s will in the matter].
64The whole assembly totaled 42,360, 65besides their male and female servants who numbered 7,337; and [among them] they had 200 male and female singers. 66Their horses totaled 736; their mules, 245; 67their camels totaled 435; their donkeys, 6,720.
68Some of the heads of the fathers’ households (extended families), when they arrived at the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, made voluntary contributions for the house of God to rebuild it on its [old] foundation. 69They gave according to their ability to the treasury for the work, 61,000 drachmas of gold, 5,000 minas of silver, and 100 priestly [linen] garments.
70So the priests, the Levites, some of the people, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants settled in their [own] cities, and all Israel [gradually settled] into their cities.

Ezra 3
Altar And Sacrifices Restored
1When the seventh month came and the sons of Israel were in the cities, the people gathered together as one man to Jerusalem. 2Then Jeshua the son of Jozadak and his brothers the priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and his brothers arose, and they built the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings on it, as it is written in the Law of Moses, the man of God. 3So they set up the altar on its [old] foundation, for they were terrified because of the peoples of the lands; and they offered burnt offerings on it to the LORD, morning and evening. 4They celebrated the Feast of Booths, as it is written, and offered the fixed number of daily burnt offerings, in accordance with the ordinances, as each day required; 5and afterward, there was the continual burnt offering, the offering at the New Moons, and at all the appointed festivals of the LORD that were consecrated, and the offerings of everyone who made a voluntary offering to the LORD. 6From the first day of the seventh month they began to offer burnt offerings to the LORD, but the foundation of the temple of the LORD had not been laid. 7They gave money to the masons and to the carpenters, and gave food, drink, and [olive] oil to the people from Sidon and Tyre, to bring cedar wood from Lebanon to the seaport of Joppa, in accordance with the authorization they had from Cyrus king of Persia.
Temple Restoration Begun 8In the second year of their coming to God’s house at Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua the son of Jozadak began [the work], with the rest of their brothers—the priests and Levites and all who came to Jerusalem from the captivity. They appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to oversee the work of the house of the LORD. 9Then Jeshua with his sons and brothers stood united with Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah and the sons of Henadad with their sons and brothers the Levites, to oversee the workmen in the house of God.
10Now when the builders had laid the foundation of the temple of the LORD, the priests stood in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Asaph, with their cymbals, to praise the LORD in accordance with the directions of David king of Israel. 11They sang [responsively], praising and giving thanks to the LORD, saying, “For He is good, for His lovingkindness (mercy) toward Israel endures forever.” And all the people shouted with a great shout when they praised the LORD because the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid. 12But many of the priests and Levites and heads of fathers’ households, the old men who had seen the first house (temple), wept with a loud voice when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, while many shouted aloud for joy, 13so that the people could not distinguish the sound of the shout of joy from the sound of the weeping of the people, for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the sound was heard far away.

Ezra 4
Adversaries Hinder The Work
1Now when [the Samaritans] the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the exiles from the captivity were building a temple to the LORD God of Israel, 2they came to Zerubbabel [who was now governor] and to the heads of the fathers’ households and said to them, “Let us build with you, for we seek your God [and worship] just as you do; and we have sacrificed to Him since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assyria, who brought us up here.” 3But Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the rest of the heads of fathers’ households of Israel said to them, “You have nothing in common with us in building a house to our God; but we ourselves will together build to the LORD God of Israel, just as King Cyrus, the king of Persia, has commanded us.”
4Then [the Samaritans and others of] the people of the land discouraged the people of Judah, and frightened them [to deter them] from building, 5and hired advisers [to work] against them to frustrate their plans during the entire time that Cyrus king of Persia reigned, [and this lasted] even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.
6Now in the reign of Ahasuerus (Xerxes), in the beginning of his reign, the Samaritans wrote [to him] an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem [who had returned from exile].
7Later, in the days of [King] Artaxerxes, Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel and the rest of their associates wrote to Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the text of the letter was written in Aramaic and translated from Aramaic. The Letter to King Artaxerxes 8Rehum the [Persian] commander [of the Samaritans] and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king as follows— 9then wrote Rehum the [Persian] commander, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their associates, the judges, the lesser governors, the officials, the secretaries, the men of Erech, the Babylonians, the men of Susa, that is, the Elamites, 10and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Osnappar deported and settled in the city of Samaria, and in the rest of the region west of the [Euphrates] River. Now 11this is a copy of the letter which they sent to him:

“To King Artaxerxes from your servants, the men in the region west of the [Euphrates] River; and now: 12Let it be known to the king that the Jews who came up from you have come to us at Jerusalem. They are rebuilding this rebellious and evil city and are finishing its walls and repairing the foundations. 13Now let it be known to the king, that if that city is rebuilt and the walls are finished, then they will not pay tax, custom, or toll, and the revenue of the kings will be diminished. 14Now because we are in the service of the palace, and it is not proper for us to witness the king’s dishonor, for that reason we have sent word and informed the king, 15in order that a search may be made in the record books of your fathers. And you will discover in the record books and learn that this is a rebellious city, damaging to kings and provinces, and that in the past they have incited rebellion within it. That is why that city was laid waste (destroyed). 16“We are informing the king that if that city is rebuilt and its walls finished, it will mean that you will have no possession in the province west of the [Euphrates] River.”
The King Replies and Work Stops 17Then the king sent an answer to Rehum the [Persian] commander, to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their colleagues who live in Samaria and in the rest of the provinces west of the River: “Peace (Greetings). And now, 18The document which you sent to us has been translated and read before me. 19I have issued a command and a search has been made, and it has been discovered that this city [Jerusalem] in earlier times has revolted against the kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been perpetrated in it. 20There have also been mighty kings over Jerusalem who have ruled over all the provinces west of the [Euphrates] River, and tax, custom, and toll were paid to them. 21So, now issue a decree to make these men stop [work], so that this city is not rebuilt until a [new] command is issued by me. 22“Beware of being negligent in carrying out this matter. Why should damage increase to the detriment of the kings?”
23Then as soon as the copy of King Artaxerxes’ document was read before Rehum and Shimshai the scribe, and their colleagues, they went up hurriedly to Jerusalem to the Jews, and made them stop [work] by force of arms.
24Then the work on the house of God in Jerusalem stopped. It was suspended until the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.

Ezra 5
Temple Work Resumed
1Now when the prophets, Haggai the prophet and Zechariah, the son (grandson) of Iddo, prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel, whose Spirit was over them, 2then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel [heir to the throne of Judah] and Jeshua the son of Jozadak arose and began to rebuild the house of God in Jerusalem; and the prophets of God [Haggai and Zechariah] were with them, supporting and encouraging them.
3At that time Tattenai, the governor of the province on the west side of the [Euphrates] River, and Shethar-bozenai and their colleagues came to them and said, “Who issued you a decree and authorized you to rebuild this temple and to restore this wall (shrine)?” 4Then, accordingly, we told them the names of the men who were reconstructing this building. 5But the eye of their God was on the elders of the Jews, so they [Tattenai and the others] did not stop them until a report could come before Darius, and then an answer was returned by letter concerning it.
Adversaries Write to Darius 6This is a copy of the letter that Tattenai, governor of the province west of the [Euphrates] River, and Shethar-bozenai and his associates, the officials who were west of the River, sent to Darius the king. 7They sent a report to him in which it was written: “To Darius the king, all peace. 8Let it be known to the king that we have gone to the province of Judah, to the house of the great God. It is being built with huge stones, with beams laid in the walls; and this work goes on with diligence and care and is succeeding in their hands. 9Then we asked those elders, ‘Who issued you a decree to rebuild this temple and to finish this structure?’ 10We also asked them their names so that we might notify you, and so that we might record the names of the men in charge. 11They replied, ‘We are servants of the God of heaven and earth, and are rebuilding the temple which was erected many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished. 12‘But because our fathers provoked the God of heaven to wrath, He handed them over to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this temple and exiled the people to Babylon. 13‘But in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, [the same] King Cyrus issued a decree to rebuild this house of God. 14‘Also the gold and silver utensils of the house of God which Nebuchadnezzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem and had brought into the temple of Babylon, King Cyrus took from the temple of Babylon and had them given to a man whose name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had appointed governor. 15‘And Cyrus said to him, “Take these utensils, go and deposit them in the temple in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt on its site.” 16‘Then that Sheshbazzar came and laid the foundations of the house of God in Jerusalem; and from then until now it has been under construction and is not yet completed.’ 17“So now, if it pleases the king, let a search be conducted in the king’s treasure house [in the royal archives] there in Babylon to see if it is true that a decree was issued by King Cyrus to rebuild this house of God at Jerusalem; and let the king send us his decision concerning this matter.”

Ezra 6
Darius Finds Cyrus’ Decree
1Then King Darius issued a decree, and a search was conducted in Babylon in the archives where the treasures [and records] were stored. 2In Ecbatana in the fortress (palace) in the province of Media, a scroll was found on which this was recorded: “Memorandum— 3In the first year of King Cyrus, Cyrus the king issued a decree: ‘Concerning the house of God in Jerusalem, let the temple (house), the place where sacrifices are offered, be rebuilt and let its foundations be strongly laid, its height and its width each 60 cubits, 4with three layers of huge stones and one layer of timbers. Let the cost be paid from the royal treasury. 5‘Also let the gold and silver utensils of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took from the temple in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon, be returned and brought back to their [proper] places in the temple in Jerusalem; and you shall put them in the house of God.’
6“Now therefore, Tattenai, governor of the province west of the [Euphrates] River, Shethar-bozenai and your associates, the officials who are west of the River, keep far away from there. 7Leave the work on this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews and the Jewish elders rebuild this house of God on its site. 8Also, I issue a decree as to what you are to do for these Jewish elders for the rebuilding of this house of God: the full cost is to be paid to these people from the royal treasury out of the taxes of the provinces west of the River, and that without delay. 9Whatever is needed, including young bulls, rams, and lambs for the burnt offerings to the God of heaven, and wheat, salt, wine, and anointing oil, according to the request of the priests at Jerusalem, let it all be given to them daily without fail, 10so that they may offer pleasing (sweet-smelling) sacrifices to the God of heaven and pray for the life of the king and his sons. 11I have also issued a decree that if there is any man who violates this edict, a beam of timber shall be pulled from his house [and set up]; then he shall be impaled on it, and his house shall be turned into a refuse heap for this [violation]. 12“May the God who has caused His Name to dwell there overthrow any king or people who attempts to alter this command, so as to destroy this house of God in Jerusalem. I, Darius, have issued this decree; let it be carried out quickly and with due diligence.”
The Temple Completed and Dedicated 13Then Tattenai, governor of the province west of the [Euphrates] River, with Shethar-bozenai and their associates carried out the decree with due diligence, just as King Darius had sent and commanded. 14And the Jewish elders built and prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. They finished their building as commanded by the God of Israel and in accordance with the decree of Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes king of Persia. 15This temple was finished on the third day of the month of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of King Darius.
16And all Israel—the priests, the Levites, and the rest of the [former] exiles—celebrated the dedication of this house of God with joy. 17They offered at the dedication of this house of God 100 bulls, 200 rams, 400 lambs, and, as a sin offering for all Israel, 12 male goats, according to the number of Israel’s tribes. 18Then they appointed the priests to their divisions and the Levites in their orders for the service of God at Jerusalem, as it is written in the book of Moses.
The Passover Observed 19The [former] exiles kept the Passover on the fourteenth [day] of the first month. 20For the priests and the Levites had purified themselves together; all of them were [ceremonially] clean. So they slaughtered the Passover lamb for all the exiles, for their brothers the priests, and for themselves. 21The Passover was eaten by the sons (descendants) of Israel (Jacob) who returned from exile and by all those who had separated themselves from the [ceremonial] uncleanness of the nations of the land to join them, in order to seek the LORD God of Israel. 22They observed the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days with joy, for the LORD had caused them to rejoice and had turned the heart of the king of Assyria toward them, so that he encouraged them and strengthened their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.

Ezra 7
Ezra Journeys From Babylon To Jerusalem
1Now after this, in the reign of Artaxerxes I [son of Ahasuerus (Xerxes)] king of Persia, Ezra the son (descendant) of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah, 2the son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub, 3the son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth, 4the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki, 5the son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest— 6this Ezra went up from Babylon. He was a scribe skilled in the Law (the five books) of Moses, which the LORD God of Israel had given; and the king granted him everything that he asked, for the hand of the LORD his God was on him. 7Some of the sons of Israel, with some of the priests and Levites, the singers and gatekeepers, and the temple servants also went up [from Babylon] to Jerusalem in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes.
8Ezra came to Jerusalem in the fifth month of the seventh year of the king. 9For on the first of the first month he started out from Babylon, and on the first of the fifth month he arrived in Jerusalem, because the good hand of his God was on him. 10For Ezra had set his heart (resolved) to study and interpret the Law of the LORD, and to practice it and teach His statutes and ordinances in Israel.
King’s Decree on Behalf of Ezra 11Now this is a copy of the decree that King Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe [who was] learned in the words of the commandments of the LORD and of His statutes to Israel: 12“Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, perfect peace (greetings). And now 13I have issued a decree that all of the people of Israel and their priests and the Levites in my kingdom who are willing to go to Jerusalem, may go with you. 14For you are sent by the king and his seven advisers to inquire about Judah and Jerusalem in accordance with the Law of your God, which is in your hand, 15and to bring [with you] the silver and gold which the king and his advisers have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose dwelling is in Jerusalem, 16and all the silver and gold which you find in the whole province of Babylon, along with the freewill offering of the people and of the priests for the house of their God in Jerusalem. 17Therefore with this money, you shall diligently buy bulls, rams, and lambs, with their grain offerings and drink offerings, and offer them on the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem. 18And whatever seems good to you and to your brothers to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, you may do in accordance with the will of your God. 19As for the utensils which are given to you for the service of the house of your God, deliver [those] in full before the God of Jerusalem. 20The rest of the things required for the house of your God, which you may have occasion to provide, provide it from the royal treasury.
21“And I, Artaxerxes the king, issue a decree to all the treasurers in the provinces west of the [Euphrates] River, that whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, may require of you, it shall be done diligently and at once— 22even up to 100 talents of silver, 100 kors (measures) of wheat, 100 baths of wine, 100 baths of [olive] oil, and salt as needed. 23Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done diligently and with enthusiasm for the house of the God of heaven, so that there will not be wrath against the kingdom of the king and his sons. 24We also inform you that it is not authorized to impose tax, tribute, or toll on any of the priests, Levites, singers, doorkeepers, temple servants or other servants of this house of God.
25“You, Ezra, are to appoint magistrates and judges in accordance with the wisdom and instruction of your God which is in your hand, so that they may judge all the people who are in the province west of the [Euphrates] River; appoint those who know the laws of your God; and you may teach anyone who does not know them. 26“Whoever does not observe and practice the law of your God and the law of the king, let judgment be executed upon him strictly and promptly, whether it be for death or banishment or confiscation of property or imprisonment.”
The King’s Kindness 27Blessed be the LORD, the God of our fathers [said Ezra], who put such a thing as this in the king’s heart, to adorn and glorify the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, 28and has extended His mercy and lovingkindness to me before the king, his advisers, and all the king’s mighty officials. I was strengthened and encouraged, for the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, and I gathered together outstanding men of Israel to go up with me [to Jerusalem].

Ezra 8
People Who Went With Ezra
1These are the heads of their fathers’ households and this is the genealogy of those who went up with me from Babylon in the reign of King Artaxerxes: 2of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hattush; 3of the sons of Shecaniah who was of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah, and with him were registered 150 men by genealogy; 4of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai son of Zerahiah, with 200 men; 5of the sons of Zattu, Shecaniah son of Jahaziel, with 300 men; 6of the sons of Adin, Ebed son of Jonathan, with 50 men; 7of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah son of Athaliah, with 70 men; 8of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah son of Michael, with 80 men; 9of the sons of Joab, Obadiah son of Jehiel, with 218 men; 10of the sons of Bani, Shelomith son of Josiphiah, with 160 men; 11of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah son of Bebai, with 28 men; 12of the sons of Azgad, Johanan son of Hakkatan, with 110 men; 13of the sons of Adonikam, the last to come, their names are Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, with 60 men; 14and of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zabbud, with 70 men.
Ezra Sends for Levites 15Now I gathered them together at the river that runs to Ahava, where we camped for three days. I observed the people and the priests, and I did not find any Levites there. 16So I sent for Eliezer, Ariel, Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah, and Meshullam, [who were] leading men, and also for Joiarib and Elnathan, [who were] teachers. 17And I sent them to Iddo, the leading man at the place Casiphia, telling them what to say to Iddo and his brothers, the temple servants at the place Casiphia, that is, to bring us servants (ministers) for the house of our God. 18And as the good hand of our God was upon us, they brought us a man of understanding (insight) from the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel, named Sherebiah, with his sons and his brothers (relatives), 18 men; 19and Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, with his brothers (relatives) and their sons, 20 men; 20also 220 of the temple servants, whom David and the leaders had set apart [with their descendants] for the service of the Levites. They were all designated by name.
Protection of God Invoked 21Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river Ahava, so that we might humble ourselves before our God to seek from Him a safe journey for us, our children, and all our possessions. 22For I was ashamed to request troops and horsemen from the king to protect us from the enemy along the way, because we had told the king, “The hand of our God is favorable toward all those who seek Him, but His power and His anger are against all those who abandon (turn away from) Him.” 23So we fasted and sought [help from] our God concerning this [matter], and He heard our plea.
24Then I set apart twelve leading priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brothers (relatives), 25and I weighed out to them the silver, the gold, and the utensils, the offering for the house of our God which the king, his advisers, his officials, and all Israel who were present there had offered. 26I weighed into their hands 650 talents of silver, and silver utensils worth 100 talents, and 100 talents of gold; 27also 20 bowls of gold worth 1,000 darics, and two utensils of fine shiny bronze, precious as gold. 28Then I said to them, “You are holy to the LORD, the utensils are holy, and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering to the LORD God of your fathers. 29“Guard and keep them until you weigh them before the leading priests and the Levites and the leaders of the fathers’ households of Israel in Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the LORD.” 30So the priests and the Levites received the weighed out silver and gold, and the utensils, to bring them to Jerusalem to the house of our God.
31We set out from the river Ahava on the twelfth [day] of the first month to go to Jerusalem; and the hand of our God was upon us, and He rescued us from the hand of the enemy and those who lay in ambushes along the way. 32So we came to Jerusalem and remained there for three days. Treasure Placed in the Temple 33On the fourth day the silver and the gold and the utensils were weighed out in the house of our God into the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest, and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and with them were the Levites—Jozabad the son of Jeshua and Noadiah the son of Binnui. 34Every piece was counted and weighed, and all the weight was recorded at that time.
35Also the [former] exiles who had come from the captivity offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel: 12 bulls for all Israel, 96 rams, 77 lambs, and 12 male goats for a sin offering. All this was a burnt offering to the LORD. 36And they delivered the king’s edicts to the king’s satraps (lieutenants) and to the governors west of the [Euphrates] River, and they supported the people and God’s house.

Ezra 9
Mixed Marriages
1When these things were completed, the officials came to me and said, “The people of Israel and the priests and Levites have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands, but have committed the repulsive acts of the Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Jebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egyptians, and Amorites. 2“For they have taken some of their daughters as wives for themselves and for their sons, so that the holy race has intermingled with the peoples of the lands. Indeed, the officials and chief men have been foremost in this unfaithful act and direct violation [of God’s will].” 3When I heard this, I tore my clothing and my robe [in grief], I pulled out some of the hair from my head and my beard, and sat down appalled [at the shame of it]. 4Then everyone who trembled at the words of the God of Israel because of the unfaithfulness of the exiles gathered to me as I sat appalled until the evening offering.
Prayer of Confession 5At the evening offering I arose from my [time of] humiliation and penitence and having torn my clothing and my robe, I fell on my knees and stretched out my hands to the LORD my God, 6and I said, “O my God, I am ashamed and embarrassed to lift up my face to You, my God, for our wrongdoings have risen higher than our heads and our guilt has grown to the heavens. 7Since the days of our fathers to this day we have been exceedingly guilty; and on account of our wrongdoings we, our kings, and our priests have been handed over to the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, to plundering, and to complete shame, as it is today. 8But now for a brief moment grace has been [shown to us] from the LORD our God, who has left us a surviving remnant and has given us a peg (secure hold) in His holy place, that our God may enlighten our eyes and give us a little reviving in our bondage. 9For we are slaves; yet our God has not abandoned us in our bondage, but has extended lovingkindness to us before the kings of Persia, to revive us to rebuild the house of our God, to repair the site of its ruins and to give us a wall [of protection] in Judah and Jerusalem.
10“Now, O our God, what shall we say after this? For we have abandoned (turned away from) Your commandments, 11which You have commanded by Your servants the prophets, saying, ‘The land which you are entering to possess is a defiled land with the uncleanness of the peoples of the lands, through their repulsive acts which have filled it from one end to the other along with their impurity. 12‘So now do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons; and never seek their peace or their prosperity, so that you may be strong and eat the good things of the land and leave it as an inheritance to your children forever.’ 13And after everything that has come upon us for our evil deeds and for our great guilt, since You our God have punished us less than our wrongdoings deserve, and have given us survivors like these, 14shall we again break Your commandments and intermarry with the peoples who practice these repulsive acts? Would You not be angry with us to the point of total destruction, so that there would be no remnant nor survivor? 15“O LORD God of Israel, You are [uncompromisingly] just (righteous), for we have been left as survivors, as it is this day. Behold, we are before You in our guilt, for no one can stand before You because of this.”

Ezra 10
Reconciliation With God
1Now while Ezra was praying and confessing, weeping and laying himself face down before the house of God, a very large group from Israel, of men, women, and children, gathered to him, for the people wept bitterly. 2Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, of the sons of Elam, said to Ezra, “We have been unfaithful to our God and have married foreign women from the peoples of the land; yet now there is hope for Israel in spite of this. 3Therefore let us now make a covenant with our God to send away all the [foreign] wives and their children, in accordance with the advice of my lord and of those who tremble [in reverent obedience] at the commandment of our God; and let it be done in accordance with the Law. 4“Stand up, for it is your duty, and we will be with you. Be brave and act.”
5Then Ezra stood and made the leaders of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel, take an oath that they would act in accordance with this proposal; so they took the oath. 6Then Ezra got up from before the house of God and went into the chamber of Jehohanan the son of Eliashib [and spent the night there]. He did not eat bread nor drink water, for he was mourning over the [former] exiles’ faithlessness. 7They made a proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem to all the [former] exiles, that they were to assemble at Jerusalem, 8and that whoever would not come within three days, by order of the counsel of the leaders and the elders, all his possessions and property would be forfeited and he himself would be excluded from the assembly of the exiles.
9So all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered at Jerusalem within three days. It was the twentieth [day] of the ninth month, and all the people sat in the open square in front of the house of God, trembling because of [the seriousness of] this matter and because of the heavy rain. 10Then Ezra the priest stood up and said to them, “You have been unfaithful [to God] and have married foreign (pagan) women, adding to the guilt of Israel. 11“So now, make confession to the LORD God of your fathers and do His will. Separate yourselves from the peoples of the land and from [your] foreign wives.” 12Then all the assembly replied with a loud voice, “It is our responsibility to do just as you have said. 13But there are many people and it is the season of heavy rain; so we are unable to stand outside. Nor can the task be done in a day or two, for we have transgressed greatly in this matter. 14“Let our leaders stand for and represent the entire assembly; let all those in our cities who have married foreign wives come at appointed times, together with the elders and judges of each city, until the burning anger of our God over this matter is turned away from us.” 15Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of Tikvah opposed this, and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite supported them.
16Then the [former] exiles did so. Ezra the priest and men who were heads of fathers’ households were selected, according to their fathers’ households, each of them by name; and they sat down on the first day of the tenth month to investigate the matter. 17And by the first day of the first month they finished investigating all the men married to foreign wives.
List of Offenders 18Now among the sons of the priests who had married foreign women were found: of the sons of Jeshua [the high priest] the son of Jozadak, and his brothers—Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib, and Gedaliah. 19They vowed to send away their [pagan] wives, and being guilty, they each offered a ram of the flock for their offense. 20Of the sons of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah; 21and of the sons of Harim: Maaseiah, Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel, and Uzziah; 22and of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
23Of the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah, that is, Kelita, Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
24Of the singers: Eliashib; and of the gatekeepers: Shallum, Telem, and Uri.
25Of Israel, of the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malchijah, Mijamin, Eleazar, Malchijah (Hashabiah), and Benaiah; 26and of the sons of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth, and Elijah; 27and of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Jeremoth, Zabad, and Aziza; 28and of the sons also of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai; 29and of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Jashub, Sheal, and Jeremoth; 30and of the sons of Pahath-moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui, and Manasseh; 31and of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, 32Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah; 33of the sons of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei; 34of the sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, Uel, 35Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhi, 36Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 37Mattaniah, Mattenai, Jaasu, 38Bani, Binnui, Shimei, 39Shelemiah, Nathan, Adaiah, 40Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, 41Azarel, Shelemiah, Shemariah, 42Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph. 43Of the sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, and Benaiah. 44All these had married foreign women, and some of them had wives by whom they had children.

Ezra 1
Proclamation Of Cyrus
1Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia [that is, the first year he ruled Babylon], in order to fulfill the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah [the prophet], the LORD stirred up (put in motion) the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he sent a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and also put it in writing, saying:
2“Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, ‘The LORD, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth and He has appointed me to build Him a house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 3‘Whoever there is among you of all His people, may his God be with him! Let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah and rebuild the house of the LORD, the God of Israel; He is God who is in Jerusalem. 4‘In any place where a survivor (Jewish exile) may live, let the men (Gentiles) of that place support him with silver and gold, with goods and cattle, together with freewill offerings for the house of God in Jerusalem.’”
Holy Articles Restored 5Then the heads of the fathers’ households of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests and Levites, all those whose spirits God had stirred up, arose to go up and rebuild the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem. 6All those who were around them encouraged them with articles of silver, with gold, with goods, with cattle, and with valuable things, in addition to all that was given as a freewill offering. 7Also King Cyrus brought out the articles of the house of the LORD, which Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem [when he captured that city] and had put in the house of his gods. 8And Cyrus, king of Persia, had Mithredath the treasurer bring them out, and he counted them out to Sheshbazzar, the governor (leader) of Judah. 9And they counted: 30 dishes (basins) of gold, 1,000 dishes of silver, 29 duplicates; 1030 [small] gold bowls, 410 [small] silver bowls of a second kind, and 1,000 other articles. 11All the articles of gold and of silver totaled 5,400. All these Sheshbazzar [the governor] brought up with the exiles who went from Babylon up to Jerusalem.

Ezra 2
Number Of Those Returning
1Now these are the people of the province [of Judah] who came up from the captivity of the exiles, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had deported to Babylon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city. 2These came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah.

The number of the men of the people of Israel: 3the sons (descendants) of Parosh, 2,172; 4the sons of Shephatiah, 372; 5the sons of Arah, 775; 6the sons of Pahath-moab of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, 2,812; 7the sons of Elam, 1,254; 8the sons of Zattu, 945; 9the sons of Zaccai, 760; 10the sons of Bani, 642; 11the sons of Bebai, 623; 12the sons of Azgad, 1,222; 13the sons of Adonikam, 666; 14the sons of Bigvai, 2,056; 15the sons of Adin, 454; 16the sons of Ater of Hezekiah, 98; 17the sons of Bezai, 323; 18the sons of Jorah, 112; 19the sons of Hashum, 223; 20the sons of Gibbar, 95; 21the men of Bethlehem, 123; 22the men of Netophah, 56; 23the men of Anathoth, 128; 24the sons of Azmaveth, 42; 25the sons of Kiriath-arim, Chephirah and Beeroth, 743; 26the sons of Ramah and Geba, 621; 27the men of Michmas, 122; 28the men of Bethel and Ai, 223; 29the sons of Nebo, 52; 30the sons of Magbish, 156; 31the sons of the other Elam, 1,254; 32the sons of Harim, 320; 33the sons of Lod, Hadid and Ono, 725; 34the men of Jericho, 345; 35the sons of Senaah, 3,630.
Priests Returning 36The priests: the sons of Jedaiah of the house of Jeshua, 973; 37the sons of Immer, 1,052; 38the sons of Pashhur, 1,247; 39the sons of Harim, 1,017.
Levites Returning 40The Levites: the sons of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodaviah, 74. 41The singers: the sons of Asaph, 128. 42The sons of the gatekeepers: of Shallum, Ater, Talmon, Akkub, Hatita, and Shobai, in all 139.
43The temple servants: the sons of Ziha, Hasupha, Tabbaoth, 44the sons of Keros, Siaha, Padon, 45the sons of Lebanah, Hagabah, Akkub, 46the sons of Hagab, Shalmai, Hanan, 47the sons of Giddel, Gahar, Reaiah, 48the sons of Rezin, Nekoda, Gazzam, 49the sons of Uzza, Paseah, Besai, 50the sons of Asnah, Meunim, Nephisim, 51the sons of Bakbuk, Hakupha, Harhur, 52the sons of Bazluth, Mehida, Harsha, 53the sons of Barkos, Sisera, Temah, 54the sons of Neziah, Hatipha.
55The sons of [King] Solomon’s servants: the sons of Sotai, Hassophereth (Sophereth), Peruda, 56the sons of Jaalah, Darkon, Giddel, 57the sons of Shephatiah, Hattil, Pochereth-hazzebaim, Ami.
58All the temple servants and the sons of Solomon’s servants totaled 392.
59Now these are the ones who came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addan, and Immer, but they could not provide evidence of their fathers’ households and their descendants, whether they were of Israel: 60the sons of Delaiah, Tobiah, and Nekoda, 652. Priests Removed 61Of the sons of the priests: the sons of Hobaiah, of Hakkoz, and of Barzillai, who took a wife from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and he was known by their name. 62These searched [for their names] among those registered in the genealogies, but they were not found; so they were excluded from the priesthood as [ceremonially] unclean. 63The governor told them that they should not eat of the most holy things [the priests’ food] until a priest stood up with Urim and Thummim [who by consulting these articles in his breastplate could determine God’s will in the matter].
64The whole assembly totaled 42,360, 65besides their male and female servants who numbered 7,337; and [among them] they had 200 male and female singers. 66Their horses totaled 736; their mules, 245; 67their camels totaled 435; their donkeys, 6,720.
68Some of the heads of the fathers’ households (extended families), when they arrived at the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, made voluntary contributions for the house of God to rebuild it on its [old] foundation. 69They gave according to their ability to the treasury for the work, 61,000 drachmas of gold, 5,000 minas of silver, and 100 priestly [linen] garments.
70So the priests, the Levites, some of the people, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants settled in their [own] cities, and all Israel [gradually settled] into their cities.

Ezra 3
Altar And Sacrifices Restored
1When the seventh month came and the sons of Israel were in the cities, the people gathered together as one man to Jerusalem. 2Then Jeshua the son of Jozadak and his brothers the priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and his brothers arose, and they built the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings on it, as it is written in the Law of Moses, the man of God. 3So they set up the altar on its [old] foundation, for they were terrified because of the peoples of the lands; and they offered burnt offerings on it to the LORD, morning and evening. 4They celebrated the Feast of Booths, as it is written, and offered the fixed number of daily burnt offerings, in accordance with the ordinances, as each day required; 5and afterward, there was the continual burnt offering, the offering at the New Moons, and at all the appointed festivals of the LORD that were consecrated, and the offerings of everyone who made a voluntary offering to the LORD. 6From the first day of the seventh month they began to offer burnt offerings to the LORD, but the foundation of the temple of the LORD had not been laid. 7They gave money to the masons and to the carpenters, and gave food, drink, and [olive] oil to the people from Sidon and Tyre, to bring cedar wood from Lebanon to the seaport of Joppa, in accordance with the authorization they had from Cyrus king of Persia.
Temple Restoration Begun 8In the second year of their coming to God’s house at Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and Jeshua the son of Jozadak began [the work], with the rest of their brothers—the priests and Levites and all who came to Jerusalem from the captivity. They appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to oversee the work of the house of the LORD. 9Then Jeshua with his sons and brothers stood united with Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah and the sons of Henadad with their sons and brothers the Levites, to oversee the workmen in the house of God.
10Now when the builders had laid the foundation of the temple of the LORD, the priests stood in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites, the sons of Asaph, with their cymbals, to praise the LORD in accordance with the directions of David king of Israel. 11They sang [responsively], praising and giving thanks to the LORD, saying, “For He is good, for His lovingkindness (mercy) toward Israel endures forever.” And all the people shouted with a great shout when they praised the LORD because the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid. 12But many of the priests and Levites and heads of fathers’ households, the old men who had seen the first house (temple), wept with a loud voice when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, while many shouted aloud for joy, 13so that the people could not distinguish the sound of the shout of joy from the sound of the weeping of the people, for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the sound was heard far away.

Ezra 4
Adversaries Hinder The Work
1Now when [the Samaritans] the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the exiles from the captivity were building a temple to the LORD God of Israel, 2they came to Zerubbabel [who was now governor] and to the heads of the fathers’ households and said to them, “Let us build with you, for we seek your God [and worship] just as you do; and we have sacrificed to Him since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assyria, who brought us up here.” 3But Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the rest of the heads of fathers’ households of Israel said to them, “You have nothing in common with us in building a house to our God; but we ourselves will together build to the LORD God of Israel, just as King Cyrus, the king of Persia, has commanded us.”
4Then [the Samaritans and others of] the people of the land discouraged the people of Judah, and frightened them [to deter them] from building, 5and hired advisers [to work] against them to frustrate their plans during the entire time that Cyrus king of Persia reigned, [and this lasted] even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.
6Now in the reign of Ahasuerus (Xerxes), in the beginning of his reign, the Samaritans wrote [to him] an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem [who had returned from exile].
7Later, in the days of [King] Artaxerxes, Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel and the rest of their associates wrote to Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the text of the letter was written in Aramaic and translated from Aramaic. The Letter to King Artaxerxes 8Rehum the [Persian] commander [of the Samaritans] and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king as follows— 9then wrote Rehum the [Persian] commander, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their associates, the judges, the lesser governors, the officials, the secretaries, the men of Erech, the Babylonians, the men of Susa, that is, the Elamites, 10and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Osnappar deported and settled in the city of Samaria, and in the rest of the region west of the [Euphrates] River. Now 11this is a copy of the letter which they sent to him:

“To King Artaxerxes from your servants, the men in the region west of the [Euphrates] River; and now: 12Let it be known to the king that the Jews who came up from you have come to us at Jerusalem. They are rebuilding this rebellious and evil city and are finishing its walls and repairing the foundations. 13Now let it be known to the king, that if that city is rebuilt and the walls are finished, then they will not pay tax, custom, or toll, and the revenue of the kings will be diminished. 14Now because we are in the service of the palace, and it is not proper for us to witness the king’s dishonor, for that reason we have sent word and informed the king, 15in order that a search may be made in the record books of your fathers. And you will discover in the record books and learn that this is a rebellious city, damaging to kings and provinces, and that in the past they have incited rebellion within it. That is why that city was laid waste (destroyed). 16“We are informing the king that if that city is rebuilt and its walls finished, it will mean that you will have no possession in the province west of the [Euphrates] River.”
The King Replies and Work Stops 17Then the king sent an answer to Rehum the [Persian] commander, to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their colleagues who live in Samaria and in the rest of the provinces west of the River: “Peace (Greetings). And now, 18The document which you sent to us has been translated and read before me. 19I have issued a command and a search has been made, and it has been discovered that this city [Jerusalem] in earlier times has revolted against the kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been perpetrated in it. 20There have also been mighty kings over Jerusalem who have ruled over all the provinces west of the [Euphrates] River, and tax, custom, and toll were paid to them. 21So, now issue a decree to make these men stop [work], so that this city is not rebuilt until a [new] command is issued by me. 22“Beware of being negligent in carrying out this matter. Why should damage increase to the detriment of the kings?”
23Then as soon as the copy of King Artaxerxes’ document was read before Rehum and Shimshai the scribe, and their colleagues, they went up hurriedly to Jerusalem to the Jews, and made them stop [work] by force of arms.
24Then the work on the house of God in Jerusalem stopped. It was suspended until the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.

Ezra 5
Temple Work Resumed
1Now when the prophets, Haggai the prophet and Zechariah, the son (grandson) of Iddo, prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel, whose Spirit was over them, 2then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel [heir to the throne of Judah] and Jeshua the son of Jozadak arose and began to rebuild the house of God in Jerusalem; and the prophets of God [Haggai and Zechariah] were with them, supporting and encouraging them.
3At that time Tattenai, the governor of the province on the west side of the [Euphrates] River, and Shethar-bozenai and their colleagues came to them and said, “Who issued you a decree and authorized you to rebuild this temple and to restore this wall (shrine)?” 4Then, accordingly, we told them the names of the men who were reconstructing this building. 5But the eye of their God was on the elders of the Jews, so they [Tattenai and the others] did not stop them until a report could come before Darius, and then an answer was returned by letter concerning it.
Adversaries Write to Darius 6This is a copy of the letter that Tattenai, governor of the province west of the [Euphrates] River, and Shethar-bozenai and his associates, the officials who were west of the River, sent to Darius the king. 7They sent a report to him in which it was written: “To Darius the king, all peace. 8Let it be known to the king that we have gone to the province of Judah, to the house of the great God. It is being built with huge stones, with beams laid in the walls; and this work goes on with diligence and care and is succeeding in their hands. 9Then we asked those elders, ‘Who issued you a decree to rebuild this temple and to finish this structure?’ 10We also asked them their names so that we might notify you, and so that we might record the names of the men in charge. 11They replied, ‘We are servants of the God of heaven and earth, and are rebuilding the temple which was erected many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished. 12‘But because our fathers provoked the God of heaven to wrath, He handed them over to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this temple and exiled the people to Babylon. 13‘But in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, [the same] King Cyrus issued a decree to rebuild this house of God. 14‘Also the gold and silver utensils of the house of God which Nebuchadnezzar had taken from the temple in Jerusalem and had brought into the temple of Babylon, King Cyrus took from the temple of Babylon and had them given to a man whose name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had appointed governor. 15‘And Cyrus said to him, “Take these utensils, go and deposit them in the temple in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt on its site.” 16‘Then that Sheshbazzar came and laid the foundations of the house of God in Jerusalem; and from then until now it has been under construction and is not yet completed.’ 17“So now, if it pleases the king, let a search be conducted in the king’s treasure house [in the royal archives] there in Babylon to see if it is true that a decree was issued by King Cyrus to rebuild this house of God at Jerusalem; and let the king send us his decision concerning this matter.”

Ezra 6
Darius Finds Cyrus’ Decree
1Then King Darius issued a decree, and a search was conducted in Babylon in the archives where the treasures [and records] were stored. 2In Ecbatana in the fortress (palace) in the province of Media, a scroll was found on which this was recorded: “Memorandum— 3In the first year of King Cyrus, Cyrus the king issued a decree: ‘Concerning the house of God in Jerusalem, let the temple (house), the place where sacrifices are offered, be rebuilt and let its foundations be strongly laid, its height and its width each 60 cubits, 4with three layers of huge stones and one layer of timbers. Let the cost be paid from the royal treasury. 5‘Also let the gold and silver utensils of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took from the temple in Jerusalem and brought to Babylon, be returned and brought back to their [proper] places in the temple in Jerusalem; and you shall put them in the house of God.’
6“Now therefore, Tattenai, governor of the province west of the [Euphrates] River, Shethar-bozenai and your associates, the officials who are west of the River, keep far away from there. 7Leave the work on this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews and the Jewish elders rebuild this house of God on its site. 8Also, I issue a decree as to what you are to do for these Jewish elders for the rebuilding of this house of God: the full cost is to be paid to these people from the royal treasury out of the taxes of the provinces west of the River, and that without delay. 9Whatever is needed, including young bulls, rams, and lambs for the burnt offerings to the God of heaven, and wheat, salt, wine, and anointing oil, according to the request of the priests at Jerusalem, let it all be given to them daily without fail, 10so that they may offer pleasing (sweet-smelling) sacrifices to the God of heaven and pray for the life of the king and his sons. 11I have also issued a decree that if there is any man who violates this edict, a beam of timber shall be pulled from his house [and set up]; then he shall be impaled on it, and his house shall be turned into a refuse heap for this [violation]. 12“May the God who has caused His Name to dwell there overthrow any king or people who attempts to alter this command, so as to destroy this house of God in Jerusalem. I, Darius, have issued this decree; let it be carried out quickly and with due diligence.”
The Temple Completed and Dedicated 13Then Tattenai, governor of the province west of the [Euphrates] River, with Shethar-bozenai and their associates carried out the decree with due diligence, just as King Darius had sent and commanded. 14And the Jewish elders built and prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. They finished their building as commanded by the God of Israel and in accordance with the decree of Cyrus and Darius and Artaxerxes king of Persia. 15This temple was finished on the third day of the month of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of King Darius.
16And all Israel—the priests, the Levites, and the rest of the [former] exiles—celebrated the dedication of this house of God with joy. 17They offered at the dedication of this house of God 100 bulls, 200 rams, 400 lambs, and, as a sin offering for all Israel, 12 male goats, according to the number of Israel’s tribes. 18Then they appointed the priests to their divisions and the Levites in their orders for the service of God at Jerusalem, as it is written in the book of Moses.
The Passover Observed 19The [former] exiles kept the Passover on the fourteenth [day] of the first month. 20For the priests and the Levites had purified themselves together; all of them were [ceremonially] clean. So they slaughtered the Passover lamb for all the exiles, for their brothers the priests, and for themselves. 21The Passover was eaten by the sons (descendants) of Israel (Jacob) who returned from exile and by all those who had separated themselves from the [ceremonial] uncleanness of the nations of the land to join them, in order to seek the LORD God of Israel. 22They observed the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days with joy, for the LORD had caused them to rejoice and had turned the heart of the king of Assyria toward them, so that he encouraged them and strengthened their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.

Ezra 7
Ezra Journeys From Babylon To Jerusalem
1Now after this, in the reign of Artaxerxes I [son of Ahasuerus (Xerxes)] king of Persia, Ezra the son (descendant) of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah, 2the son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub, 3the son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth, 4the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki, 5the son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest— 6this Ezra went up from Babylon. He was a scribe skilled in the Law (the five books) of Moses, which the LORD God of Israel had given; and the king granted him everything that he asked, for the hand of the LORD his God was on him. 7Some of the sons of Israel, with some of the priests and Levites, the singers and gatekeepers, and the temple servants also went up [from Babylon] to Jerusalem in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes.
8Ezra came to Jerusalem in the fifth month of the seventh year of the king. 9For on the first of the first month he started out from Babylon, and on the first of the fifth month he arrived in Jerusalem, because the good hand of his God was on him. 10For Ezra had set his heart (resolved) to study and interpret the Law of the LORD, and to practice it and teach His statutes and ordinances in Israel.
King’s Decree on Behalf of Ezra 11Now this is a copy of the decree that King Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe [who was] learned in the words of the commandments of the LORD and of His statutes to Israel: 12“Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, perfect peace (greetings). And now 13I have issued a decree that all of the people of Israel and their priests and the Levites in my kingdom who are willing to go to Jerusalem, may go with you. 14For you are sent by the king and his seven advisers to inquire about Judah and Jerusalem in accordance with the Law of your God, which is in your hand, 15and to bring [with you] the silver and gold which the king and his advisers have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose dwelling is in Jerusalem, 16and all the silver and gold which you find in the whole province of Babylon, along with the freewill offering of the people and of the priests for the house of their God in Jerusalem. 17Therefore with this money, you shall diligently buy bulls, rams, and lambs, with their grain offerings and drink offerings, and offer them on the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem. 18And whatever seems good to you and to your brothers to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, you may do in accordance with the will of your God. 19As for the utensils which are given to you for the service of the house of your God, deliver [those] in full before the God of Jerusalem. 20The rest of the things required for the house of your God, which you may have occasion to provide, provide it from the royal treasury.
21“And I, Artaxerxes the king, issue a decree to all the treasurers in the provinces west of the [Euphrates] River, that whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, may require of you, it shall be done diligently and at once— 22even up to 100 talents of silver, 100 kors (measures) of wheat, 100 baths of wine, 100 baths of [olive] oil, and salt as needed. 23Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done diligently and with enthusiasm for the house of the God of heaven, so that there will not be wrath against the kingdom of the king and his sons. 24We also inform you that it is not authorized to impose tax, tribute, or toll on any of the priests, Levites, singers, doorkeepers, temple servants or other servants of this house of God.
25“You, Ezra, are to appoint magistrates and judges in accordance with the wisdom and instruction of your God which is in your hand, so that they may judge all the people who are in the province west of the [Euphrates] River; appoint those who know the laws of your God; and you may teach anyone who does not know them. 26“Whoever does not observe and practice the law of your God and the law of the king, let judgment be executed upon him strictly and promptly, whether it be for death or banishment or confiscation of property or imprisonment.”
The King’s Kindness 27Blessed be the LORD, the God of our fathers [said Ezra], who put such a thing as this in the king’s heart, to adorn and glorify the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, 28and has extended His mercy and lovingkindness to me before the king, his advisers, and all the king’s mighty officials. I was strengthened and encouraged, for the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, and I gathered together outstanding men of Israel to go up with me [to Jerusalem].

Ezra 8
People Who Went With Ezra
1These are the heads of their fathers’ households and this is the genealogy of those who went up with me from Babylon in the reign of King Artaxerxes: 2of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hattush; 3of the sons of Shecaniah who was of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah, and with him were registered 150 men by genealogy; 4of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai son of Zerahiah, with 200 men; 5of the sons of Zattu, Shecaniah son of Jahaziel, with 300 men; 6of the sons of Adin, Ebed son of Jonathan, with 50 men; 7of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah son of Athaliah, with 70 men; 8of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah son of Michael, with 80 men; 9of the sons of Joab, Obadiah son of Jehiel, with 218 men; 10of the sons of Bani, Shelomith son of Josiphiah, with 160 men; 11of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah son of Bebai, with 28 men; 12of the sons of Azgad, Johanan son of Hakkatan, with 110 men; 13of the sons of Adonikam, the last to come, their names are Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, with 60 men; 14and of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zabbud, with 70 men.
Ezra Sends for Levites 15Now I gathered them together at the river that runs to Ahava, where we camped for three days. I observed the people and the priests, and I did not find any Levites there. 16So I sent for Eliezer, Ariel, Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah, and Meshullam, [who were] leading men, and also for Joiarib and Elnathan, [who were] teachers. 17And I sent them to Iddo, the leading man at the place Casiphia, telling them what to say to Iddo and his brothers, the temple servants at the place Casiphia, that is, to bring us servants (ministers) for the house of our God. 18And as the good hand of our God was upon us, they brought us a man of understanding (insight) from the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel, named Sherebiah, with his sons and his brothers (relatives), 18 men; 19and Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, with his brothers (relatives) and their sons, 20 men; 20also 220 of the temple servants, whom David and the leaders had set apart [with their descendants] for the service of the Levites. They were all designated by name.
Protection of God Invoked 21Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river Ahava, so that we might humble ourselves before our God to seek from Him a safe journey for us, our children, and all our possessions. 22For I was ashamed to request troops and horsemen from the king to protect us from the enemy along the way, because we had told the king, “The hand of our God is favorable toward all those who seek Him, but His power and His anger are against all those who abandon (turn away from) Him.” 23So we fasted and sought [help from] our God concerning this [matter], and He heard our plea.
24Then I set apart twelve leading priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brothers (relatives), 25and I weighed out to them the silver, the gold, and the utensils, the offering for the house of our God which the king, his advisers, his officials, and all Israel who were present there had offered. 26I weighed into their hands 650 talents of silver, and silver utensils worth 100 talents, and 100 talents of gold; 27also 20 bowls of gold worth 1,000 darics, and two utensils of fine shiny bronze, precious as gold. 28Then I said to them, “You are holy to the LORD, the utensils are holy, and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering to the LORD God of your fathers. 29“Guard and keep them until you weigh them before the leading priests and the Levites and the leaders of the fathers’ households of Israel in Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the LORD.” 30So the priests and the Levites received the weighed out silver and gold, and the utensils, to bring them to Jerusalem to the house of our God.
31We set out from the river Ahava on the twelfth [day] of the first month to go to Jerusalem; and the hand of our God was upon us, and He rescued us from the hand of the enemy and those who lay in ambushes along the way. 32So we came to Jerusalem and remained there for three days. Treasure Placed in the Temple 33On the fourth day the silver and the gold and the utensils were weighed out in the house of our God into the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest, and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and with them were the Levites—Jozabad the son of Jeshua and Noadiah the son of Binnui. 34Every piece was counted and weighed, and all the weight was recorded at that time.
35Also the [former] exiles who had come from the captivity offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel: 12 bulls for all Israel, 96 rams, 77 lambs, and 12 male goats for a sin offering. All this was a burnt offering to the LORD. 36And they delivered the king’s edicts to the king’s satraps (lieutenants) and to the governors west of the [Euphrates] River, and they supported the people and God’s house.

Ezra 9
Mixed Marriages
1When these things were completed, the officials came to me and said, “The people of Israel and the priests and Levites have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands, but have committed the repulsive acts of the Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Jebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egyptians, and Amorites. 2“For they have taken some of their daughters as wives for themselves and for their sons, so that the holy race has intermingled with the peoples of the lands. Indeed, the officials and chief men have been foremost in this unfaithful act and direct violation [of God’s will].” 3When I heard this, I tore my clothing and my robe [in grief], I pulled out some of the hair from my head and my beard, and sat down appalled [at the shame of it]. 4Then everyone who trembled at the words of the God of Israel because of the unfaithfulness of the exiles gathered to me as I sat appalled until the evening offering.
Prayer of Confession 5At the evening offering I arose from my [time of] humiliation and penitence and having torn my clothing and my robe, I fell on my knees and stretched out my hands to the LORD my God, 6and I said, “O my God, I am ashamed and embarrassed to lift up my face to You, my God, for our wrongdoings have risen higher than our heads and our guilt has grown to the heavens. 7Since the days of our fathers to this day we have been exceedingly guilty; and on account of our wrongdoings we, our kings, and our priests have been handed over to the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, to plundering, and to complete shame, as it is today. 8But now for a brief moment grace has been [shown to us] from the LORD our God, who has left us a surviving remnant and has given us a peg (secure hold) in His holy place, that our God may enlighten our eyes and give us a little reviving in our bondage. 9For we are slaves; yet our God has not abandoned us in our bondage, but has extended lovingkindness to us before the kings of Persia, to revive us to rebuild the house of our God, to repair the site of its ruins and to give us a wall [of protection] in Judah and Jerusalem.
10“Now, O our God, what shall we say after this? For we have abandoned (turned away from) Your commandments, 11which You have commanded by Your servants the prophets, saying, ‘The land which you are entering to possess is a defiled land with the uncleanness of the peoples of the lands, through their repulsive acts which have filled it from one end to the other along with their impurity. 12‘So now do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons; and never seek their peace or their prosperity, so that you may be strong and eat the good things of the land and leave it as an inheritance to your children forever.’ 13And after everything that has come upon us for our evil deeds and for our great guilt, since You our God have punished us less than our wrongdoings deserve, and have given us survivors like these, 14shall we again break Your commandments and intermarry with the peoples who practice these repulsive acts? Would You not be angry with us to the point of total destruction, so that there would be no remnant nor survivor? 15“O LORD God of Israel, You are [uncompromisingly] just (righteous), for we have been left as survivors, as it is this day. Behold, we are before You in our guilt, for no one can stand before You because of this.”

Ezra 10
Reconciliation With God
1Now while Ezra was praying and confessing, weeping and laying himself face down before the house of God, a very large group from Israel, of men, women, and children, gathered to him, for the people wept bitterly. 2Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, of the sons of Elam, said to Ezra, “We have been unfaithful to our God and have married foreign women from the peoples of the land; yet now there is hope for Israel in spite of this. 3Therefore let us now make a covenant with our God to send away all the [foreign] wives and their children, in accordance with the advice of my lord and of those who tremble [in reverent obedience] at the commandment of our God; and let it be done in accordance with the Law. 4“Stand up, for it is your duty, and we will be with you. Be brave and act.”
5Then Ezra stood and made the leaders of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel, take an oath that they would act in accordance with this proposal; so they took the oath. 6Then Ezra got up from before the house of God and went into the chamber of Jehohanan the son of Eliashib [and spent the night there]. He did not eat bread nor drink water, for he was mourning over the [former] exiles’ faithlessness. 7They made a proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem to all the [former] exiles, that they were to assemble at Jerusalem, 8and that whoever would not come within three days, by order of the counsel of the leaders and the elders, all his possessions and property would be forfeited and he himself would be excluded from the assembly of the exiles.
9So all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered at Jerusalem within three days. It was the twentieth [day] of the ninth month, and all the people sat in the open square in front of the house of God, trembling because of [the seriousness of] this matter and because of the heavy rain. 10Then Ezra the priest stood up and said to them, “You have been unfaithful [to God] and have married foreign (pagan) women, adding to the guilt of Israel. 11“So now, make confession to the LORD God of your fathers and do His will. Separate yourselves from the peoples of the land and from [your] foreign wives.” 12Then all the assembly replied with a loud voice, “It is our responsibility to do just as you have said. 13But there are many people and it is the season of heavy rain; so we are unable to stand outside. Nor can the task be done in a day or two, for we have transgressed greatly in this matter. 14“Let our leaders stand for and represent the entire assembly; let all those in our cities who have married foreign wives come at appointed times, together with the elders and judges of each city, until the burning anger of our God over this matter is turned away from us.” 15Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of Tikvah opposed this, and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite supported them.
16Then the [former] exiles did so. Ezra the priest and men who were heads of fathers’ households were selected, according to their fathers’ households, each of them by name; and they sat down on the first day of the tenth month to investigate the matter. 17And by the first day of the first month they finished investigating all the men married to foreign wives.
List of Offenders 18Now among the sons of the priests who had married foreign women were found: of the sons of Jeshua [the high priest] the son of Jozadak, and his brothers—Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib, and Gedaliah. 19They vowed to send away their [pagan] wives, and being guilty, they each offered a ram of the flock for their offense. 20Of the sons of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah; 21and of the sons of Harim: Maaseiah, Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel, and Uzziah; 22and of the sons of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
23Of the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah, that is, Kelita, Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
24Of the singers: Eliashib; and of the gatekeepers: Shallum, Telem, and Uri.
25Of Israel, of the sons of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malchijah, Mijamin, Eleazar, Malchijah (Hashabiah), and Benaiah; 26and of the sons of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth, and Elijah; 27and of the sons of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Jeremoth, Zabad, and Aziza; 28and of the sons also of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai; 29and of the sons of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Jashub, Sheal, and Jeremoth; 30and of the sons of Pahath-moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui, and Manasseh; 31and of the sons of Harim: Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, 32Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah; 33of the sons of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei; 34of the sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, Uel, 35Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhi, 36Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 37Mattaniah, Mattenai, Jaasu, 38Bani, Binnui, Shimei, 39Shelemiah, Nathan, Adaiah, 40Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, 41Azarel, Shelemiah, Shemariah, 42Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph. 43Of the sons of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, and Benaiah. 44All these had married foreign women, and some of them had wives by whom they had children.

Nehemiah 1
Nehemiah’s Grief For The Exiles
1The words of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah:

Now it happened in the month of Chislev, in the twentieth year [of the Persian king], as I was in the capitol of Susa, 2Hanani, one of my brothers, and some men from Judah came; and I asked them about the surviving Jews who had escaped and survived the captivity, and about Jerusalem. 3They said to me, “The remnant there in the province who survived the captivity are in great distress and reproach; the wall of Jerusalem is broken down and its [fortified] gates have been burned (destroyed) by fire.”
4Now it came about when I heard these words, I sat down and wept and mourned for days; and I was fasting and praying [constantly] before the God of heaven. 5And I said, “Please, O LORD God of heaven, the great and awesome God, who keeps the covenant and lovingkindness for those who love Him and keep His commandments, 6please let Your ear be attentive and Your eyes open to hear the prayer of Your servant which I am praying before You, day and night, on behalf of Your servants, the sons (descendants) of Israel (Jacob), confessing the sins of the sons of Israel which we have committed against You; I and my father’s house have sinned. 7We have acted very corruptly against You and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the ordinances which You commanded Your servant Moses. 8Please remember the word which You commanded Your servant Moses, saying, ‘If you are unfaithful and violate your obligations to Me I will scatter you [abroad] among the peoples; 9but if you return to Me and keep My commandments and do them, though those of you who have been scattered are in the most remote part of the heavens, I will gather them from there and will bring them to the place where I have chosen for My Name to dwell.’ 10Now they are Your servants and Your people whom You have redeemed by Your great power and by Your strong hand. 11“Please, O Lord, let Your ear be attentive to the prayer of Your servant and the prayer of Your servants who delight to [reverently] fear Your Name [Your essence, Your nature, Your attributes, with awe]; and make Your servant successful this day and grant him compassion in the sight of this man [the king].”

For I was cupbearer to the king [of Persia].

Nehemiah 2
Nehemiah’s Prayer Answered
1In the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes, when wine was placed before him, I took the wine and gave it to the king. Now I had not [previously] been sad in his presence. 2So the king said to me, “Why do you look sad when you are not sick? This is nothing but sadness of heart.” Then I was very frightened, 3and I said to the king, “Let the king live forever. Why should my face not be sad when the city, the place of my fathers’ tombs, lies desolate and its gates have been consumed by fire?” 4The king said to me, “What do you request?” So I prayed to the God of heaven. 5I said to the king, “If it pleases the king, and if your servant has found favor in your presence, [I ask] that you send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers’ tombs, so that I may rebuild it.” 6The king, beside whom the queen was sitting, asked me, “How long will your journey take, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send me, and I gave him a definite time [for my return]. 7Then I said to the king, “If it pleases the king, let letters be given to me for the governors of the provinces beyond the [Euphrates] River, so that they will allow me to pass through until I reach Judah, 8and a letter to Asaph, the keeper of the king’s forest, so that he will give me timber to construct beams for the gates of the fortress which is by the temple, and for the city wall and for the house which I will occupy.” And the king granted me what I asked, for the good hand of my God was upon me.
9Then I came to the governors of the provinces beyond the [Euphrates] River and gave them the king’s letters. Now the king had sent officers of the army and horsemen with me. 10When Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official heard this, it caused them great displeasure that someone had come to see about the welfare and prosperity of the Israelites.
Nehemiah Inspects Jerusalem’s Walls 11So I came to Jerusalem and was there for three days. 12Then I got up in the night, I and a few men with me. I did not tell anyone what my God was putting in my heart to do for Jerusalem, and there was no animal with me except the one on which I was riding [so as not to attract attention]. 13So I went out at night by the Valley Gate toward the Dragon’s Well and to the Refuse Gate and inspected the walls of Jerusalem which were broken down and its gates which were consumed by fire. 14Then I passed over to the Fountain Gate and to the King’s Pool, but there was no place for the animal that I was riding to pass. 15So I went up at night by the ravine [of Kidron] and inspected the wall; then I turned back and entered [the city] by the Valley Gate, and returned. 16The officials did not know where I had gone or what I had done; nor had I yet told the Jews, the priests, the nobles, the officials, or the rest who did the work.
17Then I said to them, “You see the bad situation that we are in—how Jerusalem is desolate and lies in ruins and its gates have been burned with fire. Come, and let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem, so that we will no longer be a disgrace.” 18Then I told them how the hand of my God had been favorable to me and also about the words that the king had spoken to me. And they said, “Let us rise up and build.” So they thoroughly supported the good work. 19But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official and Geshem the Arab heard about it, they mocked us and regarded us with contempt and said, “What is this thing you are doing? Are you rebelling against the king?” 20I answered them, “The God of heaven [has appointed us for His purpose and] will give us success; therefore we His servants will arise and build, but you have no portion, right, or memorial in Jerusalem.”

Nehemiah 3
Builders Of The Walls
1Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brothers the priests and built the Sheep Gate. They consecrated it and set up its doors; and they consecrated the wall [westward] to the Tower of the Hundred, as far as the Tower of Hananel. 2Next to Eliashib the men of Jericho built, and next to them Zaccur the son of Imri built.
3Now the sons of Hassenaah built the Fish Gate; they laid its beams and set up its doors with its bolts and its bars. 4Next to them Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, made repairs. Next to him Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel, made repairs. And next to him Zadok the son of Baana also made repairs. 5Next to him the men of Tekoa made repairs, but their nobles did not support the work of their overseers.
6Joiada the son of Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah repaired the Old Gate. They laid its beams and set up its doors with its bolts and its bars. 7Next to them Melatiah the Gibeonite and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah, made repairs for the official seat (Jerusalem residence) of the governor [of the province] beyond the [Euphrates] River. 8Next to them Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, one of the goldsmiths, made repairs. Next to him Hananiah, one of the perfumers, made repairs, and they restored Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall. 9Next to them Rephaiah the son of Hur, official of half the district of Jerusalem, made repairs. 10Next to them Jedaiah the son of Harumaph made repairs opposite his own house. And next to him Hattush the son of Hashabneiah made repairs. 11Malchijah the son of Harim and Hasshub the son of Pahath-moab repaired another section and the Tower of the Furnaces. 12Next to him Shallum the son of Hallohesh, the official of half the district of Jerusalem, made repairs, he and his daughters.
13Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired the Valley Gate. They built it and set up its doors with its bolts and its bars, and repaired a thousand cubits (1,500 ft.) of the wall as far as the Refuse Gate.
14Malchijah the son of Rechab, the official of the district of Beth-haccherem repaired the Refuse Gate. He rebuilt it and set its doors with its bolts and its bars.
15Shallum the son of Col-hozeh, official of the district of Mizpah repaired the Fountain Gate. He rebuilt it and covered it [with a roof], and set up its doors with its bolts and its bars, and [he rebuilt] the wall of the Pool of Shelah (Siloam) by the King’s Garden as far as the stairs that descend [the eastern slope] from [the section of Jerusalem known as] the City of David. 16After him Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, official of half the district of Beth-zur, repaired [the wall] as far as [a point] in front of the tombs of David, and as far as the artificial pool and the house of the guards. 17After him the Levites carried out repairs under Rehum the son of Bani. Next to him Hashabiah, official of half the district of Keilah, carried out repairs for his district. 18After him their brothers carried out repairs under Bavvai the son of Henadad, official of [the other] half of the district of Keilah. 19Next to him Ezer the son of Jeshua, the official of Mizpah, repaired another section [northward] in front of the ascent to the armory at the Angle [in the wall]. 20After him Baruch son of Zabbai zealously repaired another section [toward the hill], from the Angle [in the wall] to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest. 21After him Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, repaired another [eastern] section, from the door of Eliashib’s house as far as the end of his house. 22After him the priests, the men of the [lower Jordan] valley, carried out repairs. 23After them Benjamin and Hasshub made repairs in front of their house. After them Azariah the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ananiah, carried out repairs beside his own house. 24After him Binnui the son of Henadad repaired another section [of the wall], from the house of Azariah to the Angle [in the wall] and to the corner. 25Palal the son of Uzai made repairs in front of the Angle [in the wall] and the tower projecting from the upper house (palace) of the king, which is by the courtyard of the guard. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh made repairs. 26The temple servants were living in Ophel [the hill south of the temple], and they made repairs as far as the front of the Water Gate on the east and the projecting tower. 27After them the Tekoites repaired another section in front of the great projecting tower and as far as the wall of Ophel.
28Above the Horse Gate the priests made repairs, each one in front of his own house. 29After them Zadok the son of Immer carried out repairs in front of his house. After him Shemaiah the son of Shecaniah, keeper of the East Gate, repaired the wall. 30After him Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, repaired another section. After him Meshullam the son of Berechiah carried out repairs in front of his own quarters. 31After him Malchijah, one of the goldsmiths, carried out repairs as far as the house of the temple servants and of the merchants, in front of the Inspection Gate and as far as the upper room of the corner. 32Between the upper room of the corner and the Sheep Gate the goldsmiths and merchants carried out repairs.

Nehemiah 4
Work Is Ridiculed
1But when Sanballat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, he became furious, completely enraged, and he ridiculed the Jews. 2He spoke before his brothers and the army of Samaria, “What are these feeble Jews doing? Can they restore it for themselves? Can they offer sacrifices? Can they finish in a day? Can they revive the stones from the heaps of dust and rubbish, even the ones that have been burned?” 3Now Tobiah the Ammonite was beside him, and he said, “Even what they are building—if a fox should get up on it, he would break down their stone wall.”
4[And Nehemiah prayed] Hear, O our God, how we are despised! Return their taunts on their own heads. Give them up as prey in a land of captivity. 5Do not forgive their wrongdoing and do not let their sin be wiped out before You, for they have offended the builders [and provoked You].
6So we built the wall and the entire wall was joined together to half its height, for the people had a heart to work.
7But when Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabs, the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites heard that the repair of the walls of Jerusalem went on, and that the breaches were being closed, they were very angry. 8They all conspired together to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to cause a disturbance in it. Discouragement Overcome 9But we prayed to our God, and because of them we set up a guard against them day and night.
10Then [the leaders of] Judah said, “The strength of the burden bearers is failing,
And there is much rubble;
We ourselves are unable
To rebuild the wall.”
11Our enemies said, “They will not know or see us until we are among them, kill them and put a stop to the work.” 12When the Jews who lived near them came, they said to us ten times (repeatedly), “From every place you turn, they will come up against us.” 13So I stationed armed men behind the wall in the lowest places, at the open positions [where it was least protected]; and I stationed the people in families with their swords, spears, and bows. 14When I saw their fear, I stood and said to the nobles and officials and the rest of the people: “Do not be afraid of them; [confidently] remember the Lord who is great and awesome, and [with courage from Him] fight for your brothers, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and for your homes.”
15Now when our enemies heard that we knew about their plot against us, and that God had frustrated their plan, we all returned to the wall, each one to his work. 16From that day on, half of my servants carried on the work while the other half held the spears, shields, bows, and breastplates; and the captains were behind the whole house of Judah. 17Those who were rebuilding the wall and those who carried burdens loaded themselves so that everyone worked with one hand and held a weapon with the other. 18Every builder had his sword secured at his side as he built. And the one who sounded the trumpet [to summon the troops] stood at my side. 19I said to the nobles, the officials and the rest of the people, “The work is great and extensive, and we are separated on the wall, far from one another. 20“Wherever you hear the sound of the trumpet, gather to us there. Our God will fight for us.”
21So we carried on with the work with half of them holding spears from dawn until the stars came out. 22At that time I also said to the people, “Let each man with his servant spend the night inside Jerusalem so that they may serve as a guard for us at night and a laborer during the day.” 23So neither I, my brothers (relatives), my servants, nor the men of the guard who followed me, none of us took off our clothes; each took his weapon [even] to the water.

Nehemiah 5
Usury Abolished
1Now there was a great outcry of the [poorer] people and their wives against their Jewish brothers [to whom they were deeply in debt]. 2For there were some who were saying, “We, along with our sons and our daughters, are many; therefore allow us to get grain, so that we may eat and survive.” 3There were others who were saying, “We are mortgaging our fields, our vineyards, and our houses to buy grain because of the famine.” 4There were also others who were saying, “We have borrowed money on our fields and vineyards for the [Persian] king’s [heavy] tax. 5“Now our flesh (skin) is the same as that of our brothers (relatives), and our children are like their children, yet here we are forcing (selling) our sons and our daughters to be slaves; and some of our daughters are forced into bondage already, and we are powerless [to redeem them] because our fields and vineyards belong to others.”
6Then I was very angry when I heard their outcry and these words [of accusation]. 7I thought it over and then challenged the nobles and the rulers. I said to them, “You are exacting usury (excessive interest) from your own brother (relative).” So I held a great assembly to confront them. 8I said to them, “According to our ability we have redeemed (purchased back) our Jewish brothers who were sold to the [Gentile] nations; now would you even sell your brothers, that they might be sold to us?” Then they were silent and could not find a [single] word to say. 9So I said, “What you are doing is not good. Should you not walk in the fear of our God to prevent the taunting by the [pagan] nations, our enemies? 10And likewise I, my brothers, and my servants are lending them money and grain. Please, let us stop [charging] this interest. 11“Please, give back to them this very day their fields, their vineyards, their olive groves, and their houses, and also a hundredth part of the money, the grain, the new wine, and the oil that you are lending them.” 12Then they said, “We will give it back and not require anything from them. We will do exactly as you say.” Then I called the priests and took an oath from them that they would act in accordance with this promise. 13I also shook out the front of my garment and said, “So may God shake out every man from his house and from his possessions who does not keep this promise; like this may he be shaken out and emptied.” And all the assembly said, “Amen!” And they praised the LORD. Then the people acted in accordance with this promise.
Nehemiah’s Example 14Moreover, from the day that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year to the thirty-second year of King Artaxerxes, for twelve years, neither I nor my relatives have eaten the governor’s food allowance. 15But the former governors who were [in office] before me put heavy burdens on the people and took food and wine from them in addition to forty shekels of silver [as an excessive monthly salary]; even their servants assumed authority over the people. But I did not do so because of the [reverent] fear of God. 16I also applied myself to the work on this wall; we did not buy any land, and all my servants were gathered together there for the work. 17Moreover, there were at my table a hundred and fifty Jews and officials, besides those who came to us from the nations that were around us. 18Now the following were prepared for each day: one ox and six choice sheep; also fowls (poultry) were prepared for me; and in intervals of ten days all sorts of wine was provided in abundance. Yet for all this, I did not demand the governor’s food allowance, because the servitude was heavy on this people. 19Remember me, O my God, for good, according to all I have done for this people.

Nehemiah 6
The Enemy’s Plot
1Now when Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arab, and the rest of our enemies heard that I had rebuilt the wall, and that there was no breach left in it, although at that time I had not set up doors in the gates, 2Sanballat and Geshem sent word to me, saying, “Come, let us meet together at Chephirim in the plain of Ono.” But they were planning to harm me. 3So I sent messengers to them, saying, “I am doing a great work and cannot come down. Why should the work stop while I leave to come down to [meet with] you?” 4They sent word to me four times in this way, and I answered them in the same way. 5Then Sanballat sent his servant to me in the same way the fifth time, with an open letter in his hand. 6In it was written, “It is reported among the [neighboring] nations, and Gashmu is saying that you and the Jews are planning to revolt, and that is the reason you are rebuilding the wall. And according to these reports, you are to be their king. 7“Also [it is reported that] you have appointed prophets to make a proclamation concerning you in Jerusalem, saying, ‘There is a king in Judah!’ And now these things will be reported to the [Persian] king. So come now, and let us consult together.” 8I sent a message to him, saying, “Such things as you are saying have not been done; you are inventing them in your own mind.” 9For they all wanted to frighten us, thinking, “They will become discouraged with the work and it will not be done.” But now, [O God,] strengthen my hands.
10When I went into the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah, the son of Mehetabel, who was confined at home, he said, “Let us meet [and take refuge] together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple, because they are coming to kill you, and they are coming to kill you at night.” 11But I said, “Should a man like me flee [in fear and hide]? Should someone like me enter the temple [for sanctuary] to save his life? I will not go.” 12Then I realized that God had not sent him, but he spoke this prophecy against me because Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him. 13He was hired for this reason, that I would be frightened and do as he said and sin, so that they would have [grounds to make] a malicious report in order to censure and disgrace me. 14Remember, O My God, Tobiah and Sanballat in regard to these actions of theirs, and also [remember] the prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the prophets who were trying to frighten me.
The Wall Is Finished 15So the wall was finished on the twenty-fifth [day] of [the month] Elul, in fifty-two days. 16When all our enemies heard about it, and all the [Gentile] nations around us saw it, they lost their confidence; for they recognized that this work had been accomplished with the help of our God. 17Moreover, in those days many letters went from the nobles of Judah to Tobiah, and Tobiah’s letters came to them. 18For many in Judah were bound by oath to him because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son of Arah, and his son Jehohanan had married the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah. 19Also, they were speaking about Tobiah’s good deeds in my presence, and reporting to him what I said. Then Tobiah sent letters to frighten me.

Nehemiah 7
Census Of First Returned Exiles
1Now when the wall had been rebuilt and I had set up the doors, and the gatekeepers, singers, and Levites had been appointed, 2I put my brother Hanani, with Hananiah the commander of the fortress, in charge of Jerusalem, for Hananiah was a more faithful and God-fearing man than many [of the others]. 3I said to them, “Do not let the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun is hot; and while the watchmen are still standing guard, have them shut and bar the doors. Appoint guards from the residents of Jerusalem, each at his post [on the wall], and each in front of his own house.” 4Now the city was spacious and large, but there were few people in it and the houses had not [yet] been built.
5Then my God put it into my heart to assemble the nobles, the officials, and the people to be registered by genealogy. Then I found the register of the genealogy of those who came [from Babylon] first, and I found the following record:
6These are the sons (descendants, people) of the province who came up from the captivity of the exiles whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had deported [to Babylon]; they returned to Jerusalem and to Judah, each to his city, 7the ones who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, and Baanah.

The men of the people of Israel numbered: 8the sons of Parosh, 2,172; 9the sons of Shephatiah, 372; 10the sons of Arah, 652; 11the sons of Pahath-moab of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, 2,818; 12the sons of Elam, 1,254; 13the sons of Zattu, 845; 14the sons of Zaccai, 760; 15the sons of Binnui, 648; 16the sons of Bebai, 628; 17the sons of Azgad, 2,322; 18the sons of Adonikam, 667; 19the sons of Bigvai, 2,067; 20the sons of Adin, 655; 21the sons of Ater, of Hezekiah, 98; 22the sons of Hashum, 328; 23the sons of Bezai, 324; 24the sons of Hariph, 112; 25the sons of Gibeon, 95; 26the men of Bethlehem and Netophah, 188; 27the men of Anathoth, 128; 28the men of Beth-azmaveth, 42; 29the men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah and Beeroth, 743; 30the men of Ramah and Geba, 621; 31the men of Michmas, 122; 32the men of Bethel and Ai, 123; 33the men of the other Nebo, 52; 34the sons of the other Elam, 1,254; 35the sons of Harim, 320; 36the sons of Jericho, 345; 37the sons of Lod, Hadid and Ono, 721; 38the sons of Senaah, 3,930.
39These are the priests: the sons of Jedaiah of the house of Jeshua, 973; 40the sons of Immer, 1,052; 41the sons of Pashhur, 1,247; 42the sons of Harim, 1,017.
43These are the Levites: the sons of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodevah, 74. 44The singers: the sons of Asaph, 148. 45The gatekeepers: the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, and the sons of Shobai, 138.
46The temple servants: the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hasupha, the sons of Tabbaoth, 47the sons of Keros, the sons of Sia, the sons of Padon, 48the sons of Lebana, the sons of Hagaba, the sons of Shalmai, 49the sons of Hanan, the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar, 50the sons of Reaiah, the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda, 51the sons of Gazzam, the sons of Uzza, the sons of Paseah, 52the sons of Besai, the sons of Meunim, the sons of Nephushesim, 53the sons of Bakbuk, the sons of Hakupha, the sons of Harhur, 54the sons of Bazlith, the sons of Mehida, the sons of Harsha, 55the sons of Barkos, the sons of Sisera, the sons of Temah, 56the sons of Neziah, the sons of Hatipha.
57The sons of Solomon’s servants: the sons of Sotai, the sons of Sophereth, the sons of Perida, 58the sons of Jaala, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel, 59the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the sons of Amon.
60All the temple servants and the sons of Solomon’s servants, totaled 392.
61And these were the ones who came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addon and Immer; but they [had no birth records and] could not prove their fathers’ houses or their descent, whether they were of Israel: 62the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda, 642. 63Of the priests: the sons of Hobaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, and the sons of Barzillai, who [was so named because he had] married one of the daughters of Barzillai, the [well-known] Gileadite, and was named after them. 64These men searched for their ancestral registration among those recorded in the genealogies, but it was not located; so they were excluded from the priesthood as [ceremonially] unclean. 65The governor told them that they should not eat any of the most holy food until a priest arose with Urim and Thummim [to determine God’s will in the matter].
Total of People and Gifts 66The entire assembly together was 42,360, 67besides their male and their female servants, of whom there were 7,337; and they had 245 male and female singers. 68Their horses were 736; their mules, 245; 69their camels, 435; their donkeys, 6,720.
70Some from among the heads of fathers’ households gave to the work. The governor gave to the treasury 1,000 gold drachmas, 50 basins, 530 priests’ garments. 71Some of the heads of fathers’ households gave to the treasury for the work 20,000 gold drachmas and 2,200 silver minas. 72And what the rest of the people gave was 20,000 gold drachmas, 2,000 silver minas, and 67 priests’ garments.
73So the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of the people, the temple servants, along with all Israel, lived in their cities.

And when the seventh month came, the sons (descendants) of Israel (Jacob) were in their cities.

Nehemiah 8
Ezra Reads The Law
1Then all the people gathered together as one man at the open square in front of the Water Gate; and they asked Ezra the scribe to bring the Book of the Law of Moses which the LORD had given to Israel. 2So Ezra the priest brought the Law before the assembly of men, women and all who could listen with understanding, on the first day of the seventh month. 3Then he read from it, in front of the open square which was in front of the Water Gate, from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and women, those who could understand; and all the people listened carefully to the Book of the Law. 4Ezra the scribe stood on a [large] wooden platform which they had constructed for this purpose. And beside him [on the platform] stood Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maaseiah on his right; and Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum, Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam on his left. 5Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people, for he was standing above them; and when he opened it, all the people stood up. 6Then Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God. And all the people answered, “Amen, Amen!” while lifting up their hands; and they knelt down and worshiped the LORD with their faces toward the ground. 7Also Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, explained the Law to the people, and the people remained in their places. 8So they read from the Book of the Law of God, translating and explaining it so that the people understood the reading.
“This Day Is Holy” 9Then Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra the priest and scribe, and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people, “This day is holy to the LORD your God; do not mourn or weep.” For all the people were weeping when they heard the words of the Law. 10Then Ezra said to them, “Go [your way], eat the rich festival food, drink the sweet drink, and send portions to him for whom nothing is prepared; for this day is holy to our Lord. And do not be worried, for the joy of the LORD is your strength and your stronghold.” 11So the Levites quieted all the people, saying, “Be still, for the day is holy; do not be worried.” 12Then all the people went on their way to eat, to drink, to send portions [of food to others] and to celebrate a great festival, because they understood the words which had been communicated to them.
Feast of Booths Restored 13On the second day, all of the heads of fathers’ households of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, were gathered before Ezra the scribe to gain insight into the words of the Law (divine instruction). 14They found written in the Law how the LORD had commanded through Moses that the Israelites should live in booths (huts) during the feast of the seventh month. 15So they proclaimed and published an announcement in all their cities and in Jerusalem, saying, “Go out to the hills and bring olive branches, wild olive, myrtle, palm, and other leafy branches to make booths, as it is written.” 16So the people went out and brought them and made booths for themselves, each on the roof of his house, and in their courtyards and the courtyards of God’s house, and in the open square of the Water Gate and in the square of the Gate of Ephraim. 17The entire assembly of those who had returned from the captivity made booths and lived in them. Indeed since the days of Joshua the son of Nun until that very day, the Israelites had not done so. And there was great rejoicing and celebration. 18Every day, from the first day to the last, Ezra read from the Book of the Law of God. They celebrated the feast for seven days; on the eighth day there was a [closing] solemn assembly in accordance with the ordinance.

Nehemiah 9
The People Confess Their Sin
1Now on the twenty-fourth day of this month the Israelites assembled with fasting and in sackcloth and with dirt on their heads. 2The descendants of Israel (Jacob) separated themselves from all foreigners, and stood and confessed their sins and the wrongdoings of their fathers. 3While they stood in their places, they read from the Book of the Law of the LORD their God for a fourth of the day and for another fourth [of it] they confessed [their sins] and worshiped the LORD their God. 4On the platform of the Levites stood Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and they called out with a loud voice to the LORD their God.
5Then the Levites—Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah—said, “Stand up and bless (praise, honor) the LORD your God from everlasting to everlasting. May Your glorious name be blessed
And exalted above all blessing and praise.” 6[And Ezra said],
“You are the LORD, You alone;
You have made the heavens,
The heaven of heavens with all their host (the heavenly bodies),
The earth and everything that is on it,
The seas and everything that is in them.
You give life to all of them,
And the heavenly host is bowing down [in worship] to You. 7“You are the LORD God,
Who chose Abram
And brought him out of Ur of the Chaldees,
And gave him the name Abraham. 8“You found his heart to be faithful before You,
And You made a covenant with him
To give him the land of the Canaanite,
Of the Hittite, of the Amorite,
Of the Perizzite, the Jebusite, and the Girgashite—
To give it to his descendants.
And You have fulfilled Your promise,
For You are righteous and just. 9“You saw our fathers’ affliction in Egypt,
And You heard their cry by the Red Sea (Sea of Reeds). 10“Then You performed signs and wonders against Pharaoh,
Against all his servants and all the people of his land;
For You knew that they behaved arrogantly toward them (the Israelites),
And You made a name for Yourself, as it is to this day. 11“You divided the sea before them,
So that they passed through the midst of the sea on dry land;
You hurled their pursuers into the depths,
Like a stone into mighty and raging waters. 12“And with a pillar of cloud You led them by day,
And with a pillar of fire by night
To light the way for them
In which they were to go. 13“Then You came down on Mount Sinai,
And spoke with them from heaven;
And You gave them fair ordinances and true laws,
Good statutes and commandments. 14“So You made known to them Your holy Sabbath,
And gave them commandments, statutes, and law,
Through Your servant Moses. 15“You gave them bread from heaven for their hunger,
And brought water for them out of a rock for their thirst,
And You told them to enter and take possession of
The land that You swore to give them. 16“But they, our fathers, acted arrogantly;
They stiffened their necks and would not heed Your commandments. 17“They refused to listen and obey,
And did not remember Your wondrous acts which You had performed among them;
So they stiffened their necks and [in their rebellion] appointed a leader in order to return them to slavery in Egypt.
But You are a God of forgiveness,
Gracious and merciful and compassionate,
Slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness;
And You did not abandon them. 18“Even when they had made for themselves
A calf of cast metal
And said, ‘This is your god
Who brought you up from Egypt,’
And committed great [and contemptible] blasphemies, 19You, in Your great mercy and compassion,
Did not abandon them in the wilderness;
The pillar of the cloud did not leave them by day,
To lead them in the way,
Nor the pillar of fire by night, to light for them the way they should go. 20“You [also] gave Your good Spirit to instruct them,
You did not withhold Your manna from their mouth,
And You gave them water for their thirst. 21“Indeed, for forty years You sustained them in the wilderness; they lacked nothing,
Their clothes did not wear out, and their feet did not swell. 22“You also gave them kingdoms and peoples,
And You allotted the kingdoms to them as a boundary.
So they took possession of the land of Sihon king of Heshbon
And the land of Og king of Bashan. 23“You made their children as numerous as the stars of heaven,
And You brought them into the land
Which You told their fathers to enter and possess. 24“So their sons (descendants) went in and took possession of the land;
And You subdued before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites,
And You gave them into their hand, with their kings and the peoples of the land,
To do with them as they pleased. 25“They captured fortified cities and a fertile land.
They took possession of houses full of all good things,
Hewn cisterns, vineyards, olive groves,
And fruit trees in abundance.
So they ate and were filled and became fat,
And they reveled and were delighted in Your great goodness. 26“Yet they were disobedient and rebelled against You,
And cast Your law behind their backs
And killed Your prophets who warned them
To return to You;
And they committed great [and contemptible] blasphemies. 27“Therefore You handed them over to their enemies who oppressed them.
But when they cried out to You in the time of their suffering and distress,
You heard them from heaven, and according to Your great compassion You gave them people to rescue them.
Who rescued them from the hand of their enemies. 28“But as soon as they had rest, they again did evil before You;
Therefore You abandoned them into the hand of their enemies, so that they ruled over them.
Yet when they turned and cried out again to You, You heard them from heaven,
And You rescued them many times in accordance with Your compassion, 29And You admonished them and warned them to turn them back to Your law.
Yet they acted presumptuously and arrogantly and did not heed Your commandments, but sinned against Your ordinances,
Which by keeping, a man will live.
But they turned a stubborn shoulder, stiffened their neck, and would not listen. 30“Yet You were patient with them for many years,
And admonished them and warned them by Your Spirit through Your prophets;
Still they would not listen.
Therefore You gave them into the hand (power) of the peoples of the lands. 31“Yet in Your great compassion You did not utterly destroy them or abandon them,
For You are a gracious and merciful God. 32“Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the awesome God, who keeps the covenant and lovingkindness,
Do not let all the hardship seem insignificant before You,
Which has come upon us, our kings, our princes, our priests, our prophets, our fathers and on all Your people,
Since the time of the kings of Assyria to this day. 33“However, You are just and righteous in everything that has come upon us;
For You have dealt faithfully, but we have acted wickedly. 34Our kings, our princes, our priests, and our fathers have not kept Your law
Or paid attention to Your commandments and Your warnings which You have given them. 35“But they, in their kingdom,
With Your great goodness which You gave them,
With the broad and rich land which You set before them,
Did not serve You or turn from their wicked deeds. 36“Behold, we are slaves today,
And as for the land which You gave our fathers, to eat of its fruit and its goodness,
Behold, we are slaves in it. 37“Its abundant produce is for the kings
Whom You have set over us because of our sins;
They also rule over our bodies
And over our cattle as they please,
So we are in great distress. A Covenant Results 38“Now because of all this
We are making an agreement in writing;
And on the sealed document are the names of our princes, our Levites, and our priests.”

Nehemiah 10
Signers Of The Document
1Now these were the names on the sealed document: Nehemiah the governor, the son of Hacaliah. And Zedekiah, 2Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 3Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah, 4Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 5Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, 6Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 7Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin, 8Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah—these were the priests. 9And the Levites: Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel, 10and their brothers: Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, 11Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah, 12Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 13Hodiah, Bani, Beninu. 14The leaders of the people: Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani, 15Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 16Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 17Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur, 18Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai, 19Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai, 20Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, 21Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua, 22Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 23Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub, 24Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek, 25Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah, 26Ahiah, Hanan, Anan, 27Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
Obligations of the Document 28Now the rest of the people—the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the temple servants, and all those who had separated themselves from the peoples of the lands to the Law of God, their wives, their sons, their daughters, all those who had knowledge and understanding— 29are joining with their fellow Israelites, their nobles, and are taking on themselves a curse and an oath to walk in God’s Law, which was given through Moses the servant of God, and to keep and to observe all the commandments of GOD our Lord, and His ordinances and statutes: 30and that we will not give our daughters [as wives] to the peoples of the land or take their daughters for our sons. 31As for the peoples of the land who bring merchandise or any grain on the Sabbath day to sell, we will not buy from them on the Sabbath or on a holy day; and we will give up raising crops during the seventh year [leaving the land uncultivated], and forgive every debt.
32Also we pledge ourselves to contribute yearly one third of a shekel for the service [expenses] of the house of our God: 33for the showbread; for the continual grain offerings and the continual burnt offerings; [for the offerings on] the Sabbaths, the New Moons, the [feasts at] appointed times; for the holy things, for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel; and for all the work of the house of our God.
34We have also cast lots—the priests, the Levites, and the people—for [contributing] the supply of wood, to bring it to the house of our God, according to our fathers’ households, at set times annually, to burn on the altar of the LORD our God, as it is written in the Law; 35and [we obligate ourselves] to bring the first fruits of our ground and the first fruits of all the fruit of every tree to the house of the LORD annually, 36as well as the firstborn of our sons and of our cattle, as is written in the Law, and the firstborn of our herds and flocks, to bring to the house of our God, for the priests who minister in the house of our God. 37We will bring the first [and best] of our dough, our contributions, the fruit of every tree, the new wine and the [olive] oil to the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God, and the tithe of our ground to the Levites, for the Levites are the ones who receive the tithes in all the rural towns. 38The priest, the son of Aaron, shall be with the Levites when they receive tithes, and they shall bring one-tenth of the tithes up to the house of our God, to the chambers of the storehouse. 39For the Israelites and the sons of Levi shall bring the offering of the grain, the new wine, and the oil to the chambers; the utensils of the sanctuary, the priests who are ministering, the gatekeepers, and the singers are there. In this manner, we will not neglect the house of our God.

Nehemiah 11
Time Passes; Heads Of Provinces
1Now the leaders of the people lived in Jerusalem; but the rest of the people cast lots to bring one [person] out of ten to live in Jerusalem, the holy city, while nine-tenths remained in the other cities. 2And the people blessed all the men who volunteered to live in Jerusalem.
3These are the heads of the provinces who lived in Jerusalem, but in the cities of Judah everyone lived on his property in their cities—the Israelites, the priests, the Levites, the temple servants, and the descendants of Solomon’s servants. 4And some of the sons of Judah and some of the sons of Benjamin lived in Jerusalem. From the sons of Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the sons of Perez; 5Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite. 6All the sons of Perez who lived at Jerusalem were 468 able men.
7These are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, son of Jeshaiah; 8and after him Gabbai and Sallai, 928. 9Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer, and Judah the son of Hassenuah was second in command of the city.
10Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin, 11Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the leader of the house of God, 12and their brothers (relatives, fellow workers) who did the work of the house, 822; and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, 13and his brothers, heads of fathers’ households, 242; and Amashsai the son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer, 14and their brothers, brave men, 128. Their overseer was Zabdiel the son of Haggedolim [one of the great men].
15Now from the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni; 16and Shabbethai and Jozabad, from the leaders of the Levites, who were in charge of the outside work of the house of God; 17Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who was the leader to begin the thanksgiving in prayer, and Bakbukiah, second among his brothers; and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun. 18All the Levites in the holy city totaled 284.
19The gatekeepers: Akkub, Talmon, and their kinsmen, who kept watch at the gates, totaled 172. Outside Jerusalem 20Now the rest of Israel, the priests and the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, each on his own inheritance. 21But the temple servants were living in Ophel; Ziha and Gishpa were in charge of the temple servants.
22The overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica, from Asaph’s sons, who were the singers in regard to the work of the house of God. 23For there was a command from the [Persian] king regarding the singers, as to their daily task. 24Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of the sons of Zerah the son of Judah, was the king’s representative in all matters concerning the people.
25As for the villages with their fields, some sons (descendants) of Judah lived in Kiriath-arba and its towns, Dibon and its towns, and Jekabzeel and its villages, 26in Jeshua, in Moladah, in Beth-pelet, 27in Hazar-shual and in Beersheba and its towns, 28in Ziklag and in Meconah and its towns, 29in En-rimmon, in Zorah, and in Jarmuth, 30Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages, Lachish and its fields, and Azekah and its towns. So they camped from Beersheba as far as the Hinnom Valley. 31The sons (descendants) of Benjamin also lived from Geba onward, at Michmash, Aija, Bethel and its towns, 32at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, 33Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim, 34Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, 35Lod, and Ono, the Valley of the Craftsmen. 36And certain divisions of the Levites in Judah belonged to Benjamin.

Nehemiah 12
Priests And Levites Who Returned To Jerusalem With Zerubbabel
1Now these are the priests and Levites who came up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel and with Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra, 2Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, 3Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 4Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah, 5Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 6Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah, 7Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah. These were the heads of the priests and their kinsman in the days of Jeshua.
8The Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah who was in charge of the songs of thanksgiving and praise, he and his brothers. 9Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their brothers, stood opposite them in their divisions of service. 10Now Jeshua became the father of Joiakim, Joiakim of Eliashib, Eliashib of Joiada, 11and Joiada became the father of Jonathan, and Jonathan of Jaddua.
12And in the days of Joiakim, the priests, the heads of fathers’ households were: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah; 13of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan; 14of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph; 15of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai; 16of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam; 17of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin and of Moadiah, Piltai; 18of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan; 19of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi; 20of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber; 21of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
The Chief Levites 22As for the Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, the heads of fathers’ households were registered; so were the priests, during the reign of Darius the Persian. 23The sons of Levi, heads of fathers’ households, were recorded in the Book of the Chronicles until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib. 24The heads of the Levites were Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, and their brothers opposite them, to praise and to give thanks, as commanded by David the man of God, [one] division [singing] in response to [the men in the opposite] division. 25Mattaniah, Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub were gatekeepers keeping watch at the storehouses of the gates. 26These men served in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor and Ezra the priest and scribe.
Dedication of the Wall 27Now at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought out the Levites from all their places in order to bring them to Jerusalem to celebrate the dedication with gladness, with hymns of thanksgiving, and with songs to the accompaniment of cymbals, harps, and lyres. 28So the sons of the singers gathered together from the district around Jerusalem, and from the villages of the Netophathites, 29from Beth-gilgal and from the fields of Geba and Azmaveth, for the singers had built villages for themselves around Jerusalem. 30The priests and the Levites purified themselves; they also purified the people, the gates, and the wall.
Procedures for the Temple 31Then I had the leaders of Judah come up on the wall, and I appointed two large thanksgiving choirs, the first one proceeding to the right on top of the wall toward the Refuse Gate. 32Hoshaiah and half of the leaders of Judah followed them, 33with Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam, 34Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, and Jeremiah, 35and some of the priests’ sons with trumpets, and Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph, 36and his brothers, Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God. And Ezra the scribe went in front of them. 37At the Fountain Gate they went directly up the steps of the City of David by the stairway of the wall above David’s house to the Water Gate on the east.
38The second choir went to the left; I followed with half of the people on the wall, above the Tower of the Furnaces, to the Broad Wall, 39and above the Gate of Ephraim, and by the Old Gate, by the Fish Gate, by the Tower of Hananel and the Tower of the Hundred, as far as the Sheep Gate; and they stopped at the Gate of the Guard. 40Then the two choirs stood in the house of God. So did I, and half of the officials with me; 41and the priests Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah and Hananiah, with trumpets; 42and Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang, with Jezrahiah as their leader. 43Also on that day they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced because God had given them great joy; the women and children also rejoiced, so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard from far away.
44On that day men were appointed over the chambers for the stores, the contributions, the first fruits, and the tithes, to gather into them from the fields of the cities the portions required by the law for the priests and the Levites; for Judah rejoiced over the priests and Levites who served. 45And they performed the worship of their God and the service of purification; so did the singers and gatekeepers, as David and his son Solomon had commanded. 46For in the days of David and Asaph, in ancient times, there were leaders of singers, songs of praise and hymns of thanksgiving to God. 47So in the days of Zerubbabel and [later of] Nehemiah, all Israel would give the daily portions for the singers and the gatekeepers; and they set apart the consecrated portion for the Levites, and the Levites set apart the consecrated portion for the sons of Aaron [the priests].

Nehemiah 13
Foreigners Excluded
1On that day they read aloud from the book of Moses so that the people could hear [its words], and in it was found written that no Ammonite or Moabite could ever enter the assembly of God, 2because they did not meet the Israelites with bread and water, but hired Balaam against them to curse them. Yet our God turned the curse into a blessing. 3When the Jews heard the law, they separated from Israel all who were of foreign descent.
Tobiah Expelled and the Temple Cleansed 4Now prior to this, Eliashib the priest, who was appointed over the chambers of the house of our God, and was related to Tobiah [our adversary], 5had prepared for Tobiah a large room (chamber) where previously they had put the grain offerings, the frankincense, the utensils, and the tithes of grain, new wine, and [olive] oil which were given by commandment for the Levites, the singers, and gatekeepers, and the contributions for the priests. 6But during all this time I was not at Jerusalem, for in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes [Persian] king of Babylon I went to the king. Then after some time I asked for a leave [of absence] from the king, 7and I came to Jerusalem. Then I discovered the evil [thing] that Eliashib had done for Tobiah by preparing a room for him in the courtyards of the house of God. 8It was very displeasing to me, so I threw all of Tobiah’s household furnishings out of the room. 9Then I gave an order, and they cleaned the rooms; and I put back there the utensils of the house of God with the grain offerings and the frankincense.
Tithes Restored 10I also discovered that the portions due the Levites had not been given to them, so that the Levites and the singers who did the work had gone away, each one back to his own field. 11Then I reprimanded the officials and said, “Why is the house of God neglected?” So I gathered the Levites and singers together and restored them at their posts. 12Then all Judah brought the tithe of the grain, the new wine, and the oil to the storehouses. 13I appointed [as treasurers] over the storehouses: Shelemiah the priest, Zadok the scribe, and Pedaiah of the Levites; assisting them was Hanan son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah; for they were considered faithful and reliable, and their task was to distribute [supplies] to their brothers (fellow Levites). 14O my God, remember me concerning this and do not wipe out my loyal deeds and kindnesses which I have done for the house of my God and for its services.
Sabbath Restored 15In those days I saw some in Judah who were treading wine presses on the Sabbath, and bringing in sheaves or sacks of grain and loading them on donkeys, as well as wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of loads, which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I protested and warned them on the day they sold the produce. 16Also men of Tyre were living there who brought fish and all kinds of merchandise, and they were selling them to the people of Judah on the Sabbath, even in Jerusalem. 17Then I reprimanded the nobles of Judah, and said to them, “What is this evil thing that you are doing—profaning the Sabbath day? 18“Did your fathers (ancestors) not do the same, and did our God not bring all this trouble on us and on this city? Yet you are adding to the wrath on Israel by profaning the Sabbath.”
19Now when it began to get dark at the gates of Jerusalem before the Sabbath [began], I commanded that the doors be shut and not be opened until after the Sabbath. Then I stationed some of my servants at the gates so that no load [of merchandise] would enter [Jerusalem] on the Sabbath day. 20So once or twice the merchants and sellers of every kind of merchandise spent the night outside Jerusalem. 21But I warned them, saying, “Why do you spend the night by the wall? If you do so again, I will use force against you.” From that time on, they did not come on the Sabbath. 22And I commanded the Levites to purify themselves and come and guard the gates to keep the Sabbath day holy. O my God, remember me concerning this also and have compassion on me according to the greatness of Your lovingkindness.
Mixed Marriages Forbidden 23In those days I also saw Jews who had married women from Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab. 24As for their children, half spoke in the language of Ashdod, and none of them knew how to speak [Hebrew] the language of Judah, but only the language of his own people. 25So I contended with them and cursed them and struck some of them and pulled out their hair, and made them swear by God, saying, “You shall not give your daughters [in marriage] to their sons, nor take [any of] their daughters for your sons or for yourselves. 26Did not Solomon king of Israel sin [greatly against God] regarding these things? Yet among the many nations there was no king like him. He was loved by his God, and God made him king over all Israel; nevertheless the foreign women caused even him to sin [by turning to other gods and so, judged by God, he lost his kingdom]. 27“Do we then hear about you that you have done all this great evil, acting unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign (pagan) women?” 28One of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was a son-in-law of Sanballat the Horonite, so I chased him away from me. 29O my God, remember them, because they have defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood and the Levites.
30Thus I cleansed and purified them from everything foreign (pagan), and I defined the duties of the priests and Levites, each one in his task; 31and I provided for the wood offering at appointed times and for the first fruits. O my God, [please] remember me for good [and imprint me on Your heart].

Esther 1
The Banquets Of The King
1It was in the days of Ahasuerus (Xerxes) who reigned from India to Ethiopia (Cush) over 127 provinces, 2in those days when King Ahasuerus sat on his royal throne which was at the citadel in Susa [the capital of the Persian Empire], 3in the third year of his reign he held a banquet for all his officials and his attendants. The army officers of Persia and Media, the nobles and the officials of the provinces were there in his presence. 4And he displayed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the splendor of his great majesty for many days, 180 days in all.
5When these days were completed, the king held a banquet for all the people who were present at the citadel in Susa [the capital], from the greatest [in importance] to the least, a seven-day feast in the courtyard of the garden of the king’s palace. 6There were curtains (draperies) of fine white and violet linen fastened with cords of fine purple linen to silver rings and marble columns. The couches of gold and silver rested on a mosaic floor of porphyry, marble, mother-of-pearl, and precious colored stones. 7Drinks were served in various kinds of golden goblets, and the royal wine was plentiful, in accordance with the generosity of the king. 8The drinking was carried on in accordance with the law; no one was compelled [to drink], for the king had directed each official of his household to comply with each guest’s wishes. 9Queen Vashti also held a [separate] banquet for the women in the palace of King Ahasuerus.
Queen Vashti’s Refusal 10On the seventh day, when the king’s heart was joyful with wine (in high spirits), he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zethar, and Carkas, the seven eunuchs who served in the presence of King Ahasuerus [as his attendants], 11to bring Queen Vashti before the king, wearing her royal crown (high turban), to display her beauty before the people and the officials, for she was lovely to see. 12But Queen Vashti refused to come at the king’s command, which was delivered [to her] by the eunuchs. So the king became extremely angry and burned with rage.
13Then the king spoke to the wise men who understood the times [asking for their advice]—for it was the custom of the king to speak before all those who were familiar with law and legal matters— 14and who were close to him [as advisors]: Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven officials of Persia and Media who had access to the king and were ranked highest in the kingdom. 15[He said,] “According to the law, what is to be done with Queen Vashti because she did not obey the command of King Ahasuerus which was conveyed by the eunuchs?” 16And Memucan answered in the presence of the king and the officials, “Vashti the queen has not only wronged the king but [also] all the officials (royal representatives) and all the peoples who are in all the provinces of King Ahasuerus. 17For the queen’s conduct will become known to all women, causing them to look on their husbands with contempt (disrespect), since they will say, ‘King Ahasuerus commanded Queen Vashti to be brought before him, but she did not come.’ 18This [very] day the ladies of Persia and Media who have heard of the queen’s refusal will speak [in the same way] to all the king’s officials, and there will be plenty of contempt and anger. 19If it pleases the king, let a royal command be issued by him and let it be written in the laws of the Persians and Medes so that it cannot be repealed or modified, that Vashti is no longer to come before King Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal position to another who is better and more worthy than she. 20“So when the king’s great decree is proclaimed throughout his [extensive] kingdom, all women will give honor to their husbands, from the great to the insignificant.”
21This statement (advice) pleased the king and the officials, and the king did what Memucan proposed. 22So he sent letters to all the royal provinces, to each province in its own script and to each people in their own language, saying that every man should be the master and rule in his own home and that he should speak [in the household] in the language of his own people.

Esther 2
Vashti’s Successor Sought
1After these things, when the wrath of King Ahasuerus (Xerxes) had subsided, he remembered Vashti and what she had done and what had been decreed against her. 2Then the king’s attendants, who served him, said, “Let beautiful young virgins be sought for the king. 3Let the king appoint administrators in all the provinces of his kingdom, and have them gather all the beautiful young virgins to the citadel in Susa, into the harem, under the custody of Hegai, the king’s eunuch, who is in charge of the women; and let their beauty preparations be given to them. 4“Then let the young woman who pleases the king be queen in place of Vashti.” This pleased the king, and he did accordingly.
5There was a certain Jew in the citadel of Susa whose name was Mordecai the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite, 6who had been deported from Jerusalem with the captives who had been exiled with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had exiled. 7He was the guardian of Hadassah, that is Esther, his uncle’s daughter, for she had no father or mother. The young woman was beautiful of form and face; and when her father and mother died, Mordecai took her in as his own daughter.
Esther Finds Favor 8So it came about when the king’s command and his decree were proclaimed and when many young women were gathered together in the citadel of Susa into the custody of Hegai, that Esther was taken to the king’s palace [and placed] in the custody of Hegai, who was in charge of the women. 9Now the young woman pleased Hegai and found favor with him. So he quickly provided her with beauty preparations and her [portion of] food, and he gave her seven choice maids from the king’s palace; then he transferred her and her maids to the best place in the harem. 10Esther did not reveal [the Jewish background of] her people or her family, for Mordecai had instructed her not to do so. 11Every day Mordecai [who was an attendant in the king’s court] walked back and forth in front of the courtyard of the harem to learn how Esther was getting along and what was happening to her.
12Now when it was each young woman’s turn to go before King Ahasuerus, after the end of her twelve months under the regulations for the women—for the days of their beautification were completed as follows: six months with oil of myrrh and six months with [sweet] spices and perfumes and the beauty preparations for women— 13then the young woman would go before the king in this way: anything that she wanted was given her to take with her from the harem into the king’s palace. 14In the evening she would go in and the next morning she would return to the second harem, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king’s eunuch who was in charge of the concubines. She would not return to the king unless he delighted in her and she was summoned by name.
15Now as for Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai who had taken her in as his [own] daughter, when her turn came to go in to the king, she requested nothing except what Hegai the king’s eunuch [and attendant] who was in charge of the women, advised. And Esther found favor in the sight of all who saw her. 16So Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus, to his royal palace in the tenth month, that is, the month of Tebeth (Dec-Jan), in the seventh year of his reign.
Esther Becomes Queen 17Now the king loved Esther more than all the other women, and she found favor and kindness with him more than all the [other] virgins, so that he set the royal crown on her head and made her queen in the place of Vashti. 18Then the king held a great banquet, Esther’s banquet, for all his officials and his servants; and he made a festival for the provinces and gave gifts in accordance with the resources of the king.
19And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, Mordecai was sitting at the king’s gate. 20Esther had not revealed her family or her people [that is, her Jewish background], just as Mordecai had instructed her; for Esther did what Mordecai told her just as when she was under his care. Mordecai Saves the King 21In those days, while Mordecai was sitting at the king’s gate, Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs who guarded the door, became angry and conspired to attack King Ahasuerus. 22But the plot became known to Mordecai, who informed Queen Esther, and Esther told the king in Mordecai’s name. 23Now when the plot was investigated and found to be true, both men were hanged on the gallows. And it was recorded in the Book of the Chronicles in the king’s presence.

Esther 3
Haman’s Plot Against The Jews
1After these things King Ahasuerus (Xerxes) promoted Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him and established his authority over all the officials who were with him. 2All the king’s servants who were at the king’s gate [in royal service] bowed down and honored and paid homage to Haman; for this is what the king had commanded in regard to him. But Mordecai [a Jew of the tribe of Benjamin] neither bowed down nor paid homage [to him]. 3Then the king’s servants who were at the king’s gate said to Mordecai, “Why are you disregarding the king’s command?” 4Now it happened when they had spoken to him day after day and he would not listen to them, that they told Haman to see whether Mordecai’s reason [for his behavior] would stand [as valid]; for he had told them that he was a Jew. 5When Haman saw that Mordecai neither bowed down nor paid homage to him, he was furious. 6But he disdained laying hands on Mordecai alone, for they had told him who the people of Mordecai were (his nationality); so Haman determined to destroy all the Jews, the people of Mordecai, who lived throughout the kingdom of Ahasuerus.
7In the first month, the month of Nisan (Mar-Apr), in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus, Haman cast Pur, that is, the lot, cast before him day after day [to find a lucky day to approach the king], month after month, until the twelfth month, the month of Adar (Feb-Mar). 8Then Haman said to King Ahasuerus, “There is a certain people scattered [abroad] and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of your kingdom; their laws are different from those of all other people, and they do not observe the king’s laws. Therefore it is not in the king’s interest to [tolerate them and] let them stay here. 9“If it pleases the king, let it be decreed that they be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver into the hands of those who carry out the king’s business, to put into the king’s treasuries.” 10Then the king removed his signet ring from his hand [that is, the special ring which was used to seal his letters] and gave it to Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the enemy of the Jews. 11The king said to Haman, “The silver is given to you, and the people also, to do with them as you please.”
12Then the king’s scribes (secretaries) were summoned on the thirteenth day of the first month, and it was written just as Haman commanded to the king’s satraps (chief rulers), and to the governors who were over each province and to the officials of each people, each province according to its script (writing), each people according to their own language; being written in the name of King Ahasuerus and sealed with the king’s signet ring. 13Letters were sent by couriers to all the king’s provinces to destroy, to kill and to annihilate all the Jews, both young and old, women and children, in one day, the thirteenth [day] of the twelfth month, which is the month of Adar (March 7, 473 B.C.), and to seize their belongings as plunder. 14A copy of the edict to be decreed as law in every province was published to all the peoples, so that they would be ready for this day. 15The couriers went out hurriedly by order of the king, and the decree was issued at the citadel in Susa. And while the king and Haman sat down to drink, the city of Susa was perplexed [by the unusual and alarming decree].

Esther 4
Esther Learns Of Haman’s Plot
1Now when Mordecai learned of everything that had been done, he tore his clothes [in mourning], and put on sackcloth and ashes, and went out into the center of the city and cried out loudly and bitterly. 2He went [only] as far as the king’s gate, because no one was to enter the king’s gate dressed in sackcloth. 3In each and every province that the decree and law of the king reached, there was great mourning among the Jews, with fasting, weeping and wailing; and many lay on sackcloth and ashes.
4When Esther’s maids and her eunuchs came and told her [what had happened], the queen was seized by great fear. She sent garments to clothe Mordecai so that he would remove his sackcloth, but he did not accept them. 5Then Esther summoned Hathach, one of the king’s eunuchs, whom the king had appointed to attend her, and ordered him to go to Mordecai to find out what this issue was and why it had come about. 6So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the [open] square of the city, which was in front of the king’s gate. 7Mordecai told him everything that had happened to him, and the exact amount of money that Haman had promised to pay to the king’s treasuries for the destruction of the Jews. 8Mordecai also gave him a copy of the text of the decree which had been issued in Susa for the Jews destruction, so that he might show Esther and explain it to her, and order her to go in to the king to seek his favor and plead with him for [the lives of] her people.
9Hathach came back and told Esther what Mordecai had said. 10Then Esther spoke to Hathach and ordered him to reply to Mordecai, saying: 11“All the king’s servants and the people of the king’s provinces know that for any man or woman who comes to the king to the inner court without being summoned, he has but one law, that he is to be put to death, unless the king holds out to him the golden scepter so that he may live. And as for me, I have not been summoned to come to the king for these [last] thirty days.” 12So they told Mordecai what Esther had said.
13Then Mordecai told them to reply to Esther, “Do not imagine that you in the king’s palace can escape any more than all the Jews. 14“For if you remain silent at this time, liberation and rescue will arise for the Jews from another place, and you and your father’s house will perish [since you did not help when you had the chance]. And who knows whether you have attained royalty for such a time as this [and for this very purpose]?” Esther Plans to Intercede 15Then Esther told them to reply to Mordecai, 16“Go, gather all the Jews that are present in Susa, and observe a fast for me; do not eat or drink for three days, night or day. I and my maids also will fast in the same way. Then I will go in to [see] the king [without being summoned], which is against the law; and if I perish, I perish.” 17So Mordecai went away and did exactly as Esther had commanded him.

Esther 5
Esther Plans A Banquet
1On the third day [of the fast] Esther put on her royal robes and stood in the inner court of the king’s palace opposite his [throne] room. The king was sitting on his royal throne, facing the [main] entrance of the palace. 2When the king saw Esther the queen standing in the court, she found favor in his sight; and the king extended to her the golden scepter which was in his hand. So Esther approached and touched the top of the scepter. 3Then the king said to her, “What is troubling you, Queen Esther? What is your request? It shall be given to you, up to half of the kingdom.” 4Esther said, “If it pleases the king, may the king and Haman come this day to the banquet that I have prepared for him.”
5Then the king said, “Bring Haman quickly so that we may do as Esther says.” So the king and Haman came to the banquet which Esther had prepared. 6As they drank their wine at the banquet, the king said to Esther, “What is your petition? It shall be granted to you. And what is your request? Even to half of the kingdom it shall be done.” 7Then Esther replied, “My petition and my request is this: 8if I have found favor in the sight of the king, and if it pleases the king to grant my petition and to do as I request, may the king and Haman come to the banquet that I will prepare for them; and tomorrow I will do as the king says [and express my request].”
Haman’s Pride 9Haman went away that day joyful and in good spirits. But when he saw Mordecai at the king’s gate refusing to stand up or show fear before him, he was filled with rage toward Mordecai. 10Nevertheless, Haman controlled himself and went home. There he sent for his friends and his wife Zeresh. 11Then Haman recounted to them the glory of his riches, the large number of his sons, and every instance in which the king had magnified him and how he had promoted him over the officials and servants of the king. 12Haman also said, “Even Queen Esther let no one but me come with the king to the banquet she had prepared; and tomorrow also I am invited by her [together] with the king. 13“Yet all of this does not satisfy me as long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king’s gate.” 14Then his wife Zeresh and all his friends said to him, “Have a gallows fifty cubits high made, and in the morning ask the king to have Mordecai hanged on it; then go joyfully to the banquet with the king.” And the advice pleased Haman, so he had the gallows made.

Esther 6
The King Plans To Honor Mordecai
1On that night the king could not sleep; so he ordered that the book of records and memorable deeds, the chronicles, be brought, and they were read before the king. 2It was found written there how Mordecai had reported that Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs who were doorkeepers, had planned to attack King Ahasuerus (Xerxes). 3The king said, “What honor or distinction has been given Mordecai for this?” Then the king’s servants who attended him said, “Nothing has been done for him.” 4So the king said, “Who is in the court?” Now Haman had just entered the outer court of the king’s palace to ask the king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows which he had prepared for him. 5The king’s servants said to him, “Look, Haman is standing in the court.” And the king said, “Let him come in.” 6So Haman came in and the king said to him, “What is to be done for the man whom the king desires to honor?” Now Haman thought to himself, “Whom would the king desire to honor more than me?” 7So Haman said to the king, “For the man whom the king desires to honor, 8let a royal robe be brought which the king has worn, and the horse on which the king has ridden, and on whose head a royal crown has been placed; 9and let the robe and the horse be handed over to one of the king’s most noble officials. Let him dress the man whom the king delights to honor [in the royal robe] and lead him on horseback through the open square of the city, and proclaim before him, ‘This is what shall be done for the man whom the king desires to honor.’”
Haman Must Honor Mordecai 10Then the king said to Haman, “Quickly take the royal robe and the horse, as you have said, and do this for Mordecai the Jew, who is sitting at the king’s gate. Leave out nothing of all that you have said.” 11So Haman took the royal robe and the horse and dressed Mordecai, and led him on horseback through the open square of the city, proclaiming before him, “This is what shall be done for the man whom the king desires to honor.”
12Then Mordecai returned to the king’s gate. But Haman hurried to his [own] house, mourning and with his head covered [in sorrow]. 13Then Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends everything that had happened to him. Then his wise counselors and his wife Zeresh said to him, “If Mordecai, before whom you have begun to fall in status, is of Jewish heritage, you will not overcome him, but will certainly fall before him.”
14While they were still speaking with him, the king’s eunuchs (attendants) arrived and hurriedly brought Haman to the banquet which Esther had prepared.

Esther 7
Esther’s Plea
1So the king and Haman came to drink wine with Esther the queen. 2And the king said to Esther on the second day also as they drank their wine, “What is your petition, Queen Esther? It shall be granted to you. And what is your request? Even to half of the kingdom, it shall be done.” 3Then Queen Esther replied, “If I have found favor in your sight, O king, and if it pleases the king, let my life be spared as my petition, and my people [be spared] as my request; 4for we have been sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, killed and wiped out of existence. Now if we had only been sold as slaves, men and women, I would have remained silent, for our hardship would not be sufficient to burden the king [by even mentioning it].” 5Then King Ahasuerus (Xerxes) asked Queen Esther, “Who is he, and where is he, who dares to do such a thing?” 6Esther said, “An adversary and an enemy is Haman, this evil man.” Then Haman became terrified before the king and queen. Haman Is Hanged 7Then in his fury, the king stood up from drinking wine and went into the palace garden [to decide what he should do]; but Haman stayed to plead for his life from Queen Esther, for he saw that harm had been determined against him by the king. 8When the king returned from the palace garden to the place where they were drinking wine, Haman was falling on the couch where Esther was. Then the king said, “Will he even attempt to assault the queen with me in the palace?” As the king spoke those words, the servants covered Haman’s face [in preparation for execution]. 9Then Harbonah, one of the eunuchs serving the king said, “Now look, there are gallows fifty cubits (75 ft.) high standing at Haman’s house, which Haman made for Mordecai, whose good warning saved the king.” And the king said, “Hang him on it.” 10So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the king’s anger subsided.

Esther 8
Mordecai Promoted
1On that day King Ahasuerus (Xerxes) gave the house of Haman, the enemy of the Jews, to Queen Esther; and Mordecai came before the king, because Esther had disclosed what [relation] he was to her. 2The king took off his signet ring which he had taken away from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai. And Esther put Mordecai in charge of the house of Haman.
3Then Esther spoke again to the king and fell down at his feet and wept and implored him to avert the evil plot of Haman the Agagite and his plan which he had devised against the Jews [because the decree to annihilate the Jews was still in effect]. 4Then the king held out to Esther the golden scepter. So Esther arose and stood before the king. 5Then she said, “If it pleases the king and if I have found favor before him and the matter is proper in the king’s view and I am pleasing in his sight, let it be written to revoke the letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, which he wrote [in order] to destroy the Jews who are in all the king’s provinces. 6“For how can I endure to see the tragedy that will happen to my people? Or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?” 7Then King Ahasuerus said to Queen Esther and to Mordecai the Jew, “Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and they have hanged him on the gallows because he stretched out his hand against the Jews. The King’s Decree Avenges the Jews 8“Also, concerning the Jews, write as you see fit, in the king’s name, and seal it with the king’s signet ring—for a decree which is written in the king’s name and sealed with the king’s signet ring may not be revoked.”
9So the king’s scribes were called at that time in the third month (that is, the month of Sivan) on the twenty-third day; and it was written in accordance with everything that Mordecai commanded, to the Jews, to the chief rulers (satraps), and the governors and officials of the provinces which extended from India to Ethiopia (Cush), 127 provinces, to every province in its own script (writing), and to every people in their own language and to the Jews according to their script and their language. 10He wrote [a decree] in the name of King Ahasuerus, and sealed it with the king’s ring, and sent letters by couriers on horseback, riding on the royal [mail] relay horses, the offspring of the racing mares. 11In it the king granted the Jews who were in every city the right to assemble and to defend their lives; to destroy, to kill, and to annihilate any armed force that might attack them, their little children, and women; and to take the enemies’ goods as plunder, 12on one day in all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, the thirteenth [day] of the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar). 13A copy of the edict was to be issued as a law in every province and as a proclamation to all peoples, so that the Jews would be ready on that day, to avenge themselves on their enemies. 14So the couriers, who were mounted on the royal relay horses, left quickly, urged on by the king’s command; and the decree was issued at the citadel in Susa [the capital].
15Then Mordecai departed from the presence of the king in royal apparel of blue and white, with a large crown of gold and with a robe of fine linen and purple wool; and the city of Susa shouted and rejoiced. 16For [at this time] the Jews had light [a dawn of new hope] and gladness and joy and honor. 17In each and every province and in each and every city, wherever the king’s command and his decree arrived, the Jews celebrated with gladness and joy, a feast and a holiday. And many among the peoples of the land became Jews, for the fear of the Jews [and their God] had fallen on them.

Esther 9
The Jews Destroy Their Enemies
1Now in the twelfth month (that is, the month of Adar) on the thirteenth day when the king’s command and edict were about to be executed, on the [very] day when the enemies of the Jews had hoped to gain power over them [and slaughter them], it happened the other way around so that the Jews themselves gained power over those who hated them. 2The Jews assembled in their cities throughout the provinces of King Ahasuerus (Xerxes) to apprehend those who wanted to do them harm; and no one could stand before them, for the fear of them [and their God] had fallen on all the peoples. 3Even all the officials of the provinces and the chief rulers (satraps) and the governors and those who attended to the king’s business supported the Jews [in defeating their enemies], because the fear of Mordecai [and his God’s power] had fallen on them. 4For Mordecai was great and respected in the king’s palace, and his fame spread throughout all the provinces; for the man Mordecai became greater and greater. 5So the Jews struck all their enemies with the sword, killing and destroying them; and they did what they pleased to those who hated them. 6At the citadel in Susa the Jews killed and destroyed five hundred men, 7and [they killed] Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha, 8Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha, 9Parmashta, Arisai, Aridai, and Vaizatha, 10the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Jews’ enemy; but they did not lay their hands on the plunder.
11On that day the number of those who were killed at the citadel in Susa was reported to the king. 12The king said to Queen Esther, “The Jews have killed and destroyed five hundred men and the ten sons of Haman at the citadel in Susa. What then have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces! Now what is your petition? It shall be granted to you. What is your further request? It shall also be done.” 13Esther replied, “If it pleases the king, let it be granted to the Jews who are in Susa to act tomorrow also in accordance with the decree of today; and let [the dead bodies of] Haman’s ten sons be hanged on the gallows.” 14So the king commanded it to be done; the decree was given in Susa, and they hanged [the bodies of] Haman’s ten sons. 15The Jews who were in Susa also gathered together on the fourteenth day of the month of Adar and killed three hundred men in Susa, but they did not lay their hands on the plunder.
16Now the rest of the Jews who were in the king’s provinces assembled, to defend their lives and rid themselves of their enemies, and kill 75,000 of those who hated them; but they did not lay their hands on the plunder. 17This was done on the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, and on the fourteenth day they rested and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing.
18But the Jews who were in Susa assembled on the thirteenth and on the fourteenth of the same month, and on the fifteenth day they rested and made it a day of feasting and rejoicing. 19Therefore the Jews of the villages, who live in the rural [unwalled] towns, make the fourteenth day of the month of Adar a holiday for rejoicing and feasting and sending choice portions of food to one another.
The Feast of Purim Instituted 20Now Mordecai recorded these events, and he sent letters to all the Jews who lived in all the provinces of King Ahasuerus, both near and far, 21obliging them to celebrate the fourteenth day of the month of Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same month, annually, 22because on those days the Jews rid themselves of their enemies, and as the month which was turned for them from grief to joy and from mourning into a holiday; that they should make them days of feasting and rejoicing and sending choice portions of food to one another and gifts to the poor.
23So the Jews undertook what they had started to do, and what Mordecai had written to them. 24For Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted against the Jews to destroy them and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, [to find the right time] to disturb and destroy them. 25But when it came before the king, he commanded in writing that Haman’s wicked scheme which he had devised against the Jews was to return on his own head, and that he and his sons should [endure what he planned for the Jews and] be hanged on the gallows. 26Therefore they called these days Purim after the name Pur (lot). And because of all the instructions in this letter, and what they had faced in this regard and what had happened to them, 27the Jews established and made it a custom for themselves and for their descendants and for all who joined them, so that they would not fail to celebrate these two days as it was written and at the appointed time annually. 28So these days were to be remembered and celebrated throughout every generation, every family, every province and every city; and these days of Purim were not to cease from among the Jews, nor their memory fade from their descendants.
29Then Queen Esther, the daughter of Abihail, with Mordecai the Jew, wrote with full power and authority to confirm this second letter about Purim. 30He sent letters to all the Jews, to the 127 provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, in words of peace and truth, 31to establish these days of Purim [to be observed] at their appointed times, just as Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther had established for them, and as they had established for themselves and for their descendants with instructions regarding their times of fasting and their lamentations (expressions of needing help). 32The command of Esther established these customs for Purim, and it was written in the book [of the royal archives].

Esther 10
Mordecai’s Greatness
1King Ahasuerus (Xerxes) imposed a tax on the land and on the coastlands of the sea. 2And all the accomplishments of his authority and strength, and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai to which the king had raised him, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Media and Persia? 3For Mordecai the Jew was second only to King Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews and in favor with his many fellow people, for he worked for the good of his people and spoke for the welfare and peace of his whole nation.

Job 1
Job’s Character And Wealth
1There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job; and that man was blameless and upright, and one who feared God [with reverence] and abstained from and turned away from evil [because he honored God]. 2Seven sons and three daughters were born to him. 3He also possessed 7,000 sheep, 3,000 camels, 500 yoke (pairs) of oxen, 500 female donkeys, and a very great number of servants, so that this man was the greatest [and wealthiest and most respected] of all the men of the east (northern Arabia). 4His sons used to go [in turn] and feast in the house of each one on his day, and they would send word and invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them. 5When the days of their feasting were over, Job would send [for them] and consecrate them, rising early in the morning and offering burnt offerings according to the number of them all; for Job said, “It may be that my sons have sinned and cursed God in their hearts.” Job did this at all [such] times.
6Now there was a day when the sons of God (angels) came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan (adversary, accuser) also came among them. 7The LORD said to Satan, “From where have you come?” Then Satan answered the LORD, “From roaming around on the earth and from walking around on it.” 8The LORD said to Satan, “Have you considered and reflected on My servant Job? For there is none like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man, one who fears God [with reverence] and abstains from and turns away from evil [because he honors God].” 9Then Satan answered the LORD, “Does Job fear God for nothing? 10Have You not put a hedge [of protection] around him and his house and all that he has, on every side? You have blessed the work of his hands [and conferred prosperity and happiness upon him], and his possessions have increased in the land. 11“But put forth Your hand now and touch (destroy) all that he has, and he will surely curse You to Your face.” 12Then the LORD said to Satan, “Behold, all that Job has is in your power, only do not put your hand on the man himself.” So Satan departed from the presence of the LORD.
Satan Allowed to Test Job 13Now there was a day when Job’s sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house, 14and a messenger came to Job and said, “The oxen were plowing and the donkeys were feeding beside them, 15and the Sabeans attacked and swooped down on them and took away the animals. They also killed the servants with the edge of the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you.” 16While he was still speaking, another [messenger] also came and said, “The fire of God (lightning) has fallen from the heavens and has burned up the sheep and the servants and consumed them, and I alone have escaped to tell you.” 17While he was still speaking, another [messenger] also came and said, “The Chaldeans formed three bands and made a raid on the camels and have taken them away and have killed the servants with the edge of the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you.” 18While he was still speaking, another [messenger] also came and said, “Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house, 19and suddenly, a great wind came from across the desert, and struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young people and they died, and I alone have escaped to tell you.”
20Then Job got up and tore his robe and shaved his head [in mourning for the children], and he fell to the ground and worshiped [God]. 21He said, “Naked (without possessions) I came [into this world] from my mother’s womb,
And naked I will return there.
The LORD gave and the LORD has taken away;
Blessed be the name of the LORD.”
22Through all this Job did not sin nor did he blame God.

Job 2
Job Loses His Health
1Again there was a day when the sons of God (angels) came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan (adversary, accuser) also came among them to present himself before the LORD. 2The LORD said to Satan, “From where have you come?” Then Satan answered the LORD, “From roaming around on the earth and from walking around on it.” 3The LORD said to Satan, “Have you considered and reflected on My servant Job? For there is none like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man, one who fears God [with reverence] and abstains from and turns away from evil [because he honors God]. And still he maintains and holds tightly to his integrity, although you incited Me against him to destroy him without cause.” 4Satan answered the LORD, “Skin for skin! Yes, a man will give all he has for his life. 5“But put forth Your hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh [and severely afflict him]; and he will curse You to Your face.” 6So the LORD said to Satan, “Behold, he is in your hand, only spare his life.”
7So Satan departed from the presence of the LORD and struck Job with loathsome boils and agonizingly painful sores from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. 8And Job took a piece of broken pottery with which to scrape himself, and he sat [down] among the ashes (rubbish heaps).
9Then his wife said to him, “Do you still cling to your integrity [and your faith and trust in God, without blaming Him]? Curse God and die!” 10But he said to her, “You speak as one of the [spiritually] foolish women speaks [ignorant and oblivious to God’s will]. Shall we indeed accept [only] good from God and not [also] accept adversity and disaster?” In [spite of] all this Job did not sin with [words from] his lips.
11Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this adversity that had come upon him, each one came from his own place, Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; for they had made an appointment together to come to sympathize with him and to comfort him. 12When they looked from a distance and did not recognize him [because of his disfigurement], they raised their voices and wept; and each one tore his robe [in grief] and they threw dust over their heads toward the sky [in sorrow]. 13So they sat down on the ground with Job for seven days and seven nights and no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great.

Job 3
Job’s Lament
1After this, Job opened his mouth and cursed the day of his birth. 2And Job said, 3“Let the day on which I was born perish,
And the night which announced: ‘There is a man-child conceived.’ 4“May that day be darkness;
Let God above not care about it,
Nor light shine on it. 5“Let darkness and gloom claim it for their own;
Let a cloud settle upon it;
Let all that blackens the day terrify it (the day that I was born). 6“As for that night, let darkness seize it;
Let it not rejoice among the days of the year;
Let it not be counted in the number of the months. 7“Behold, let that night be barren [and empty];
Let no joyful voice enter it. 8“Let those curse it who curse the day,
Who are skilled in rousing up Leviathan. 9“Let the stars of its early dawn be dark;
Let the morning wait in vain for the light,
Let it not see the eyelids of morning (the day’s dawning), 10Because it did not shut the doors of my mother’s womb,
Nor hide trouble from my eyes. 11“Why did I not die at birth,
Come forth from the womb and expire? 12“Why did the knees receive me?
And why the breasts, that I would nurse? 13“For now I would have lain down and been quiet;
I would have slept then, I would have been at rest [in death], 14With kings and counselors of the earth,
Who built up [now desolate] ruins for themselves; 15Or with princes who had gold,
Who filled their houses with silver. 16“Or like a miscarriage which is hidden and put away, I would not exist,
Like infants who never saw light. 17“There [in death] the wicked cease from raging,
And there the weary are at rest. 18“There the prisoners rest together;
They do not hear the taskmaster’s voice. 19“The small and the great are there,
And the servant is free from his master. 20“Why is the light given to him who is in misery,
And life to the bitter in soul, 21Who wait for death, but it does not come,
And dig (search) for death more [diligently] than for hidden treasures, 22Who rejoice exceedingly,
And rejoice when they find the grave? 23“Why is the light of day given to a man whose way is hidden,
And whom God has hedged in? 24“For my groaning comes at the sight of my food,
And my cries [of despair] are poured out like water. 25“For the thing which I greatly fear comes upon me,
And that of which I am afraid has come upon me. 26“I am not at ease, nor am I quiet,
And I am not at rest, and yet trouble still comes [upon me].”

Job 4
Eliphaz: Innocent Do Not Suffer
1Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 2“If we dare to converse with you, will you be impatient [or offended]?
But who can restrain himself from speaking? 3“Behold, you have admonished and instructed many,
And you have strengthened weak hands. 4“Your words have helped the one who was stumbling to stand,
And you have strengthened feeble knees. 5“But now adversity comes upon you, and you are impatient and intolerant;
It touches you, and you are horrified. 6“Is not your fear of God your confidence,
And [is not] the integrity and uprightness of your ways your hope? 7“Remember now, who, being innocent, ever perished?
Or where [and in what circumstances] were those upright and in right standing with God destroyed? 8“As I have seen, those who plow wickedness
And those who sow trouble and harm harvest it. 9“By the breath of God they perish,
And by the blast of His anger they are consumed. 10“The roaring of the lion and the voice of the fierce lion,
And the teeth of the young lions are broken. 11“The lion perishes for lack of prey,
And the cubs of the lioness are scattered. 12“Now a word was secretly brought to me,
And my ear received a whisper of it. 13“Amid disquieting thoughts from the visions of the night,
When deep sleep falls on men, 14Dread and trembling came upon me,
Which made all my bones shake. 15“Then a spirit passed before my face;
The hair on my skin stood on end! 16“The spirit stood still, but I could not discern its appearance;
A form was before my eyes;
There was silence, and then I heard a voice, saying: 17‘Can [mortal] man be just before God or be more righteous than He?
Can a man be pure before his Maker or be more cleansed than He? 18‘God puts no trust or confidence, even in His [heavenly] servants,
And He charges His angels with error. 19‘How much more [will He blame and charge] those who dwell in houses (bodies) of clay,
Whose foundations are in the dust,
Who are crushed like a moth. 20‘Between morning and evening they are broken in pieces and destroyed;
Unobserved and unnoticed, they perish forever. 21‘Is not their tent-cord drawn up within them [so that the tent collapses]?
Do they not die, and yet without [acquiring] wisdom?’

Job 5
God Is Just
1“Call now —is there anyone who will answer you?
And to which of the holy ones (angels) will you turn? 2“For anger slays the foolish man,
And jealousy kills the simple (naive). 3“I have seen the foolish taking root [and outwardly prospering],
But I cursed his dwelling immediately [for his destruction was certain]. 4“His children are far from safety [and included in their father’s ruin],
They are oppressed and crushed in the [court of justice in the city’s] gate,
And there is no one to rescue them. 5“The hungry devour his harvest
And take it even [when it grows] among the thorns;
The trap opens for [his] wealth. 6“For affliction does not come forth from the dust,
Nor does trouble spring forth from the ground. 7“For man is born for trouble,
[As naturally] as sparks fly upward. 8“As for me, I would seek God and inquire of Him,
And I would commit my cause to God; 9Who does great and unsearchable things,
Marvelous things without number. 10“He gives rain upon the earth
And sends waters upon the fields, 11So that He sets on high those who are lowly,
And He lifts to safety those who mourn. 12“He frustrates the devices and schemes of the crafty,
So that their hands cannot attain success or achieve anything of [lasting] worth. 13“He catches the [so-called] wise in their own shrewdness,
And the advice of the devious is quickly thwarted. 14“In the daytime they meet in darkness,
And at noon they grope as in the night. 15“But God saves [the innocent] from the sword of the mouth of the devious,
And the poor from the hand of the mighty. 16“So the helpless have hope,
And injustice shuts its mouth. 17“Behold, how happy and fortunate is the man whom God reproves,
So do not despise or reject the discipline of the Almighty [subjecting you to trial and suffering]. 18“For He inflicts pain, but He binds up and gives relief;
He wounds, but His hands also heal. 19“He will rescue you from six troubles;
Even in seven, evil will not touch you. 20“In famine He will redeem you from death,
And in war from the power of the sword. 21“You will be hidden from the scourge of the tongue,
And you will not be afraid of destruction when it comes. 22“You will laugh at violence and famine,
And you will not be afraid of the wild beasts of the earth. 23“For you will be in harmony with the stones of the field,
And the beasts of the field will be at peace with you. 24“You will know also that your tent is secure and at peace,
And you will visit your dwelling and fear no loss [nor find anything amiss]. 25“You will know also that your descendants will be many,
And your offspring as the grass of the earth. 26“You will come to your grave in old age,
Like the stacking of grain [on the threshing floor] in its season. 27“Behold this; we have investigated it, and it is true.
Hear and heed it, and know for yourself [for your own good].”

Job 6
Job’s Friends Are No Help
1Then Job answered and said, 2“Oh, that my grief could actually be weighed
And placed in the balances together with my tragedy [to see if my grief is the grief of a coward]! 3“For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea;
Therefore my words have been incoherent, 4Because the arrows of the Almighty are within me,
My spirit drinks their poison;
The terrors of God are arrayed against me. 5“Does the wild donkey bray when he has grass?
Or does the ox low over his fodder? 6“Can something that has no taste to it be eaten without salt?
Or is there any flavor in the white of an egg? 7“My soul refuses to touch them;
Such things are like loathsome food to me [sickening and repugnant]. 8“Oh that my request would come to pass,
And that God would grant me the thing that I long for! 9“I wish that it would please God to crush me,
That He would let loose His hand and cut me off. 10“Then I would still have consolation,
And I would jump for joy amid unsparing pain,
That I have not denied or hidden the words of the Holy One. 11“What strength do I have left, that I should wait [and hope]?
And what is ahead of me, that I should be patient and endure? 12“Is my strength and endurance that of stones,
Or is my flesh made of bronze? 13“Is it that I have no help within myself,
And that success and wisdom have been driven from me? 14“For the despairing man there should be kindness from his friend;
So that he does not abandon (turn away from) the fear of the Almighty. 15“My brothers have acted deceitfully like a brook,
Like the torrents of brooks that vanish, 16Which are dull and dirty because of ice,
And into which the snow melts and hides itself; 17When it is warm, they are silent and cease to flow;
When it is hot, they vanish from their place. 18“The paths of their course wind along,
They go up into nothing and perish.
[Your counsel is as helpful to me as a dry streambed in the heat of summer.] 19“The caravans of Tema looked [for water],
The caravans of Sheba waited for them [in vain]. 20“They were put to shame and disappointed because they had trusted [that they would find water];
They came there and were ashamed. 21“Indeed, you have now become like a dried-up stream,
You see a terror [believing me to be a victim of the wrath of God] and are afraid [to be compassionate]. 22“Did I ever say, ‘Give me something,’
Or, ‘Pay a bribe for me from your wealth,’ 23Or, ‘Rescue me from the adversary’s hand,’
Or, ‘Redeem me from the hand of the tyrants’? 24“Teach me, and I will be silent;
And show me how I have erred. 25“How painful are words of honesty.
But what does your argument prove? 26“Do you intend to reprove my words [with a convincing argument],
When the words of one in despair belong to the wind [and go ignored]? 27“You would cast lots (gamble) over the fatherless
And bargain away your friend. 28“Now please look at me,
And see if I lie to your face [for you know that I would not]. 29“Turn away [from your suspicion], let there be no injustice;
Turn away, my righteousness and vindication is still in it. 30“Is there injustice or malice on my tongue?
Can my palate not discern what is destructive?

Job 7
Job’s Life Seems Futile
1“Is not man forced to labor on earth?
And are not his days like the days of a hired man? 2“As a slave earnestly longs for the shade,
And as a hired man eagerly awaits his wages, 3So am I allotted months of futility and suffering,
And [long] nights of trouble and misery are appointed to me. 4“When I lie down I say,
‘When shall I arise [and the night be gone]?’
But the night continues,
And I am continually tossing until the dawning of day. 5“My body is clothed with worms and a crust of dust;
My skin is hardened [and broken and loathsome], and [breaks out and] runs. 6“My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle,
And are spent without hope. 7“Remember that my life is but breath [a puff of wind, a sigh];
My eye will not see good again. 8“The eye of him who sees me [now] will see me no more;
Your eyes will be upon me, but I will not be. 9“As a cloud vanishes and is gone,
So he who goes down to Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) does not come up. 10“He will not return again to his house,
Nor will his place know about him anymore. 11“Therefore I will not restrain my mouth;
I will speak in the anguish of my spirit,
I will complain in the bitterness of my soul [O Lord]. 12“Am I the sea, or the sea monster,
That You set a guard over me? 13“When I say, ‘My bed will comfort me,
My couch will ease my complaint,’ 14Then You frighten me with dreams
And terrify me through visions, 15So that I would choose suffocation,
Death rather than my pain. 16“I waste away and loathe my life; I will not live forever.
Let me alone, for my days are but a breath [futile and without substance]. 17“What is man that You [should] magnify him [and think him important]?
And that You are concerned about him? 18“And that You examine him every morning
And try and test him every moment? 19“Will You never turn Your gaze away from me [it plagues me],
Nor let me alone until I swallow my spittle? 20“If I have sinned, what [harm] have I done to You,
O Watcher of mankind?
Why have You set me as a target for You,
So that I am a burden to myself? 21“Why then do You not pardon my transgression
And take away my sin and guilt?
For now I will lie down in the dust;
And You will seek me [diligently], but I will not be.”

Job 8
Bildad Says God Rewards The Good
1Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said, 2“How long will you say these things?
And will the words of your mouth be a mighty wind? 3“Does God pervert justice?
Or does the Almighty pervert righteousness? 4“If your children have sinned against Him,
Then He has handed them over to the power of their transgression and punished them. 5“If you would [diligently] seek God
And implore the compassion and favor of the Almighty, 6Then, if you are pure and upright,
Surely now He will awaken for you
And restore your righteous place. 7“Though your beginning was insignificant,
Yet your end will greatly increase. 8“Inquire, please, of past generations,
And consider and apply yourself to the things searched out by their fathers. 9“For we are only of yesterday and know nothing,
Because our days on earth are [like] a shadow [just a breath or a vapor]. 10“Will they (the fathers) not teach you and tell you,
And utter words from their hearts [the deepest part of their nature]? 11“Can the papyrus grow up without a marsh?
Can the rushes or reed grass grow without water? 12“While it is still green (in flower) and not cut down,
Yet it withers before any other plant [when without water]. 13“So are the paths of all who forget God;
And the hope of the godless will perish, 14For his confidence is fragile and breaks,
And his trust is [like] a spider’s web. 15“He trusts in his house, but it does not stand;
He holds tightly to it, but it does not endure. 16“He thrives and prospers [like a green plant] before the sun,
And his branches spread out over his garden. 17“His [godless] roots are wrapped around a pile of rocks,
And he gazes at a house of stones. 18“If he is snatched from his place [in the garden],
Then his place will forget him, saying, ‘I have never seen you.’ 19“Behold, this is the joy of His way;
And from out of the dust others will spring up and grow [to take his place]. 20“Behold, God will not reject a man of integrity,
Nor will He strengthen or support evildoers. 21“He will yet fill your mouth with laughter
And your lips with joyful shouting [if you are found blameless]. 22“Those who hate you will be clothed with shame,
And the tents of the wicked will be no longer.”

Job 9
Job Says There Is No Arbitrator Between God And Man
1Then Job answered and said, 2“Yes, I know it is true.
But how can a mortal man be right before God? 3“If one should want to contend or dispute with Him,
He could not answer Him once in a thousand times. 4“God is wise in heart and mighty in strength;
Who has [ever] defied or challenged Him and remained unharmed? 5“It is God who removes the mountains, and they do not know it,
When He overturns them in His anger; 6Who shakes the earth out of its place,
And its pillars tremble; 7Who commands the sun, and it does not shine;
Who seals up the stars [from view]; 8Who alone stretches out the heavens
And tramples down the waves of the sea; 9Who made [the constellations] the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades,
And the [vast starry] spaces of the south; 10Who does great things, [beyond understanding,] unfathomable,
Yes, marvelous and wondrous things without number. 11“Behold, He passes by me, and I do not see Him;
He moves past me, but I do not perceive Him. 12“Behold, He snatches away; who can restrain or turn Him back?
Who will say to Him, ‘What are You doing?’ 13“God will not turn back His anger;
The [proud] helpers of Rahab [the arrogant monster of the sea] bow under Him. 14“How can I answer Him [and plead my case],
Choosing my words [to reason] with Him? 15For though I were righteous, I could not answer.
I must appeal for mercy to my Opponent and Judge. 16“If I called and He answered me,
I could not believe that He was listening to my voice. 17“For He bruises me with a tempest
And multiplies my wounds without cause. 18“He will not allow me to catch my breath,
But fills and saturates me with bitterness. 19“If it is a matter of strength and power, behold, He is mighty!
And if of justice, who can summon and challenge Him? 20“Though I am innocent and in the right, my own mouth would pronounce me guilty;
Though I am blameless, He would denounce me as guilty. 21“[Though] I am blameless,
I do not care about myself;
I despise my life. 22“It is all one; therefore I say,
‘He destroys [both] the blameless and the wicked.’ 23“When [His] scourge kills suddenly,
He mocks at the despair of the innocent. 24“The earth is given into the hands of the wicked;
He covers the faces of its judges [so that they are blind to justice].
If it is not He, then who is it [that is responsible for all this injustice]? 25“Now my days are swifter than a runner;
They vanish, they see no good. 26“They pass by like the [swift] boats made of reeds,
Like an eagle that swoops down on its prey. 27“If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint,
I will leave off my sad appearance, and be cheerful and brighten up,’ 28I am afraid of all my pains and worries [yet to come];
I know that You will not acquit me and leave me unpunished. 29“I am accounted wicked and held guilty;
Why then should I labor in vain [to appear innocent]? 30“If I were to wash myself with snow
And cleanse my hands with lye, 31You would still plunge me into the pit,
And my own clothes would hate me [and refuse to cover my foul body]. 32“For God is not a [mere] man, as I am, that I may answer Him,
That we may go to court and judgment together. 33“There is no arbitrator between us,
Who could lay his hand upon us both [would that there were]. 34“Let Him take His rod away from me,
And let not the dread and fear of Him terrify me. 35“Then I would speak [my defense] and not fear Him;
But I am not like that in myself.

Job 10
Job Despairs Of God’s Dealings
1“I am disgusted with my life and loathe it!
I will give free expression to my complaint;
I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. 2“I will say to God, ‘Do not condemn me [and declare me guilty]!
Show me why You contend and argue and struggle with me. 3‘Does it indeed seem right to You to oppress,
To despise and reject the work of Your hands,
And to look with favor on the schemes of the wicked? 4‘Do You have eyes of flesh?
Do You see as a man sees? 5‘Are Your days as the days of a mortal,
Are Your years as man’s years, 6That You seek my guilt
And search for my sin? 7‘Although You know that I am not guilty or wicked,
Yet there is no one who can rescue me from Your hand. 8‘Your hands have formed and made me altogether.
Would You [turn around and] destroy me? 9‘Remember now, that You have made me as clay;
So will You turn me into dust again? 10‘Have You not poured me out like milk
And curdled me like cheese? 11‘[You have] clothed me with skin and flesh,
And knit me together with bones and sinews. 12‘You have granted me life and lovingkindness;
And Your providence (divine care, supervision) has preserved my spirit. 13‘Yet these [present evils] You have hidden in Your heart [since my creation]:
I know that this was within You [in Your purpose and thought]. 14‘If I sin, then You would take note and observe me,
And You would not acquit me of my guilt. 15‘If I am wicked, woe to me [for judgment comes]!
And if I am righteous, I dare not lift up my head.
For I am sated and filled with disgrace and the sight of my misery. 16‘Should I lift my head up, You would hunt me like a lion;
And again You would show Your marvelous power against me. 17‘You renew Your witnesses against me
And increase Your indignation and anger toward me;
Hardship after hardship is with me [attacking me time after time]. 18‘Why then did You bring me out of the womb?
Would that I had perished and no eye had seen me! 19‘I should have been as though I had not existed;
[I should have been] carried from the womb to the grave.’ 20“Would He not let my few days alone,
Withdraw from me that I may have a little cheer 21Before I go—and I shall not return—
To the land of darkness and the deep shadow [of death], 22The [sunless] land of utter gloom as darkness itself,
[The land] of the shadow of death, without order,
And [where] it shines as [thick] darkness.”

Job 11
Zophar Rebukes Job
1Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said, 2“Shall a multitude of words not be answered?
And should a talkative man [making such a long-winded defense] be acquitted? 3“Should your boasts and babble silence men?
And shall you scoff and no one put you to shame? 4“For you have said, ‘My teaching (doctrine) [that God knowingly afflicts the righteous] is pure,
And I am innocent in your eyes.’ 5“But oh, that God would speak,
And open His lips [to speak] against you, 6And [that He would] show you the secrets of wisdom!
For sound wisdom has two sides.
Know therefore that God forgets a part of your wickedness and guilt. 7“Can you discover the depths of God?
Can you [by searching] discover the limits of the Almighty [ascend to His heights, extend to His widths, and comprehend His infinite perfection]? 8“His wisdom is as high as the heights of heaven. What can you do?
It is deeper than Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead). What can you know? 9“It is longer in measure [and scope] than the earth,
And broader than the sea. 10“If God passes by or arrests,
Or calls an assembly [of judgment], who can restrain Him?
[If He is against a man, who can call Him to account for it?] 11“For He recognizes and knows false and worthless men,
And He sees wickedness, will He not consider it? 12“But a hollow (empty-headed) man will become intelligent and wise
[Only] when the colt of a wild donkey is born as a man. 13“If you direct your heart [on the right path]
And stretch out your hands to Him, 14If sin is in your hand, put it far away [from you],
And do not let wrongdoing dwell in your tents; 15Then, indeed, you could lift up your face [to Him] without moral defect,
And you would be firmly established and secure and not fear. 16“For you would forget your trouble;
You would remember it as waters that have passed by. 17“And your life would be brighter than the noonday;
Darkness [then] would be like the morning. 18“Then you would trust [with confidence], because there is hope;
You would look around you and rest securely. 19“You would lie down with no one to frighten you,
And many would entreat and seek your favor. 20“But the eyes of the wicked will fail,
And they will not escape [the justice of God];
And their hope is to breathe their last [and die].”

Job 12
Job Chides His Accusers
1Then Job responded, 2“No doubt you are the [only wise] people [in the world],
And wisdom will die with you! 3“But I have intelligence and understanding as well as you;
I am not inferior to you.
Who does not know such things as these [of God’s wisdom and might]? 4“I am a joke to my friends;
I, one whom God answered when he called upon Him—
A just and blameless man is a joke [and laughed to scorn]. 5“He who is at ease has contempt for misfortune,
But misfortune is ready [and anxiously waiting] for those whose feet slip. 6“The tents of the destroyers prosper;
And those who provoke God are [apparently] secure,
Whom God brings into their power. 7“Now ask the animals, and let them teach you [that God does not deal with His creatures according to their character];
And ask the birds of the air, and let them tell you; 8Or speak to the earth [with its many forms of life], and it will teach you;
And let the fish of the sea declare [this truth] to you. 9“Who among all these does not recognize [in all these things that good and evil are randomly scattered throughout nature and human life]
That the hand of the LORD has done this, 10In whose hand is the life of every living thing,
And the breath of all mankind? 11“Does the ear not put words to the test,
Just as the palate tastes its food [distinguishing between the desirable and the undesirable]? 12“With the aged [you say] is wisdom,
And with long life is understanding. Job Speaks of the Power of God 13“But [only] with Him are [perfect] wisdom and might;
He [alone] has [true] counsel and understanding. 14“Behold, He tears down, and it cannot be rebuilt;
He imprisons a man, and there can be no release. 15“Behold, He restrains the waters, and they dry up;
Again, He sends the waters out, and they overwhelm and devastate the earth. 16“With Him are might and sound wisdom,
The misled and the misleader are His [and in His power]. 17“He makes [great and scheming] counselors walk barefoot
And makes fools of judges. 18“He loosens the bond of kings
And binds their loins with a loincloth. 19“He makes priests walk barefoot,
And He overturns men firmly seated and secure. 20“He deprives the trusted ones of speech
And takes away the discernment and discretion of the aged. 21“He pours contempt on princes and nobles
And loosens the belt of the strong [disabling them]. 22“He uncovers mysteries [that are difficult to grasp and understand] out of the darkness
And brings black gloom and the shadow of death into light. 23“He makes nations great, and He destroys them;
He enlarges nations, and leads them away [captive]. 24“He removes intelligence and understanding from the leaders of the people of the earth
And makes them wander and move blindly in a pathless waste. 25“They grope in darkness without light,
And He makes them stagger like a drunken man.”

Job 13
Job Says His Friends’ Proverbs Are Ashes
1[Job continued:] “Behold, my eye has seen all this,
My ear has heard and understood it. 2“What you know I also know;
I am not inferior to you. 3“But I wish to speak to the Almighty,
And I desire to argue with God. 4“But you smear me with lies [you defame my character most untruthfully];
You are all worthless physicians and have no remedy to offer. 5“Oh, that you would be completely silent,
And that silence would be your wisdom! 6“Please hear my argument
And listen to the pleadings of my lips. 7“Will you speak what is unjust for God,
And speak what is deceitful for Him? 8“Will you show partiality for Him [and be unjust to me so that you may gain favor with Him]?
Will you contend and plead for God? 9“Will it be well for you when He investigates you [and your tactics against me]?
Or will you deceive Him as one deceives a man? 10“He will surely reprimand you
If you secretly show partiality. 11“Will not His majesty terrify you,
And will not the dread of Him fall upon you? 12“Your memorable sayings are [worthless, merely] proverbs of ashes;
Your defenses are defenses of [crumbling] clay. Job Is Sure He Will Be Vindicated 13“Be silent before me so that I may speak;
And let happen to me what may. 14“Why should I take my flesh in my teeth
And put my life in my hands [incurring the wrath of God]? 15“Even though He kills me;
I will hope in Him.
Nevertheless, I will argue my ways to His face. 16“This also will be my salvation,
For a godless man may not come before Him. 17“Listen diligently to my speech,
And let my declaration fill your ears. 18“Behold now, I have prepared my case;
I know that I will be vindicated. 19“Who will argue and contend with me?
For then I would be silent and die. 20“Only [O Lord,] do not do two things to me,
And then I will not hide myself from Your face: 21Withdraw Your hand from me and remove this bodily suffering,
And let not the dread of You terrify me. 22“Then [Lord,] call, and I will answer;
Or let me speak, and then reply to me. 23“How many are my iniquities and sins [that so much sorrow should come to me]?
Make me recognize and understand my transgression and my sin. 24“Why do You hide Your face [as if offended]
And consider me Your enemy? 25“Will You cause a windblown leaf to tremble?
Will You pursue the chaff of the dry stubble? 26“For You write bitter things against me [in Your indictment]
And make me inherit and suffer for the iniquities of my youth. 27“You also put my feet in the stocks [as punishment]
And [critically] observe all my paths;
You set a circle and limit around the soles of my feet [which I must not overstep], 28While I waste away like a rotten thing,
Like a garment that is moth-eaten.

Job 14
Job Speaks Of The Finality Of Death
1“Man, who is born of a woman,
Is short-lived and full of turmoil. 2“Like a flower he comes forth and withers;
He also flees like a shadow and does not remain. 3“You also open Your eyes upon him
And bring him into judgment with Yourself. 4“Who can make a clean thing out of the unclean?
No one! 5“Since his days are determined,
The number of his months is with You [in Your control],
And You have made his limits so he cannot pass [his allotted time]. 6“[O God] turn your gaze from him so that he may rest,
Until he fulfills his day [on earth] like a hired man. 7“For there is hope for a tree,
If it is cut down, that it will sprout again,
And that the shoots of it will not cease nor fail, [but there is no such hope for man]. 8“Though its roots grow old in the earth
And its stump dies in the dry soil, 9Yet at the scent of water [the stump of the tree] will flourish
And bring forth sprigs and shoots like a seedling. 10“But [the brave, strong] man must die and lie face down;
Man breathes his last, and where is he? 11“As water evaporates from the sea,
And a river drains and dries up, 12So man lies down and does not rise [again].
Until the heavens are no longer,
The dead will not awake nor be raised from their sleep. 13“Oh, that You would hide me in Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead),
That You would conceal me until Your wrath is past,
That You would set a definite time and then remember me [and in Your lovingkindness imprint me on your heart]! 14“If a man dies, will he live again?
I will wait all the days of my struggle
Until my change and release will come. 15“[Then] You will call, and I will answer You;
You will long for [me] the work of Your hands. 16“But now You number [each of] my steps;
You do not observe nor take note of my sin. 17“My transgression is sealed up in a bag,
And You cover my wickedness [from Your view]. 18“But as a mountain, if it falls, crumbles into nothing,
And as the rock is moved from its place, 19Water wears away the stones,
Its floods and torrents wash away the soil of the earth,
So You [O Lord] destroy the hope of man. 20“You prevail forever against him and overpower him, and he passes on;
You change his appearance and send him away [from the presence of the living]. 21“His sons achieve honor, and he does not know it;
They become insignificant, and he is not aware of it. 22“But his body [lamenting its decay] grieves in pain over it,
And his soul mourns over [the loss of] himself.”

Job 15

Eliphaz Says Job Presumes Much
1Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered [Job] and said, 2“Should a wise man [such as you] utter such windy and vain knowledge [as we have just heard]
And fill himself with the east wind [of withering, parching, and violent accusations]? 3“Should he rebuke and argue with useless talk?
Or with words in which there is no benefit? 4“Indeed, you are doing away with fear,
And you are diminishing meditation before God. 5“For your guilt teaches your mouth,
And you choose [to speak] the language of the crafty and cunning. 6“Your own mouth condemns you, and not I;
Yes, your own lips testify against you. 7“Were you the first man to be born [the original wise man],
Or were you created before the hills? 8“Do you hear the secret counsel of God,
And do you limit [the possession of] wisdom to yourself? 9“What do you know that we do not know?
What do you understand that is not equally clear to us? 10“Among us are both the gray-haired and the aged,
Older than your father. 11“Are the consolations of God [as we have interpreted them to you] too trivial for you,
[Or] were we too gentle toward you [in our first speech] to be effective? 12“Why does your heart carry you away [allowing you to be controlled by emotion]?
And why do your eyes flash [in anger or contempt], 13That you should turn your spirit against God
And let such words [as you have spoken] go out of your mouth? 14“What is man, that he should be pure and clean,
Or he who is born of a woman, that he should be righteous and just? 15“Behold, God puts no trust in His holy ones (angels);
Indeed, the heavens are not pure in His sight— 16How much less [pure and clean is] the one who is repulsive and corrupt,
Man, who drinks unrighteousness and injustice like water! What Eliphaz Has Seen of Life 17“I will tell you, listen to me;
And what I have seen I will also declare; 18What wise men have [freely] told,
And have not hidden [anything passed on to them] from their fathers, 19To whom alone the land was given,
And no stranger passed among them [corrupting the truth]. 20“The wicked man writhes with pain all his days,
And numbered are the years stored up for him, the ruthless one. 21“A [dreadful] sound of terrors is in his ears;
While at peace and in a time of prosperity the destroyer comes upon him [the tent of the robber is not at peace]. 22“He does not believe that he will return out of the darkness [for fear of being murdered],
And he is destined for the sword [of God’s vengeance]. 23“He wanders about for food, saying, ‘Where is it?’
He knows that the day of darkness and destruction is already at hand. 24“Distress and anxiety terrify him,
They overpower him like a king ready for battle. 25“Because he has stretched out his hand against God
And behaves arrogantly against the Almighty, 26Running and charging headlong against Him
With his ornamented and massive shield; 27For he has covered his face with his fat,
Adding layers of fat to his thighs [giving himself up to pleasures], 28And he has lived in desolate [God-forsaken] cities,
In houses which no one should inhabit,
Which were destined to become heaps [of ruins]; 29He will not become rich, nor will his wealth endure;
And his grain will not bend to the earth nor his possessions be extended on the earth. 30“He will not escape from darkness [fleeing disaster];
The flame [of God’s wrath] will wither his branch,
And by the blast of His mouth he will go away. 31“Let him not trust in vanity (emptiness, futility) and be led astray;
For emptiness will be his reward [for such living]. 32“It will be fulfilled while he still lives,
And his branch will not be green [but shall wither away]. 33“He will fail to bring his grapes to maturity [leaving them to wither unnourished] on the vine,
And will cast off blossoms [and fail to bring forth fruit] like the olive tree. 34“For the company of the godless is barren,
And fire consumes the tents of bribery (wrong and injustice). 35“They conceive mischief and bring forth wickedness,
And their inmost soul prepares deceit and fraud.”

Job 16
Job Says Friends Are Sorry Comforters
1Then Job answered and said, 2“I have heard many such things;
Wearisome and miserable comforters are you all. 3“Is there no end to [your futile] words of wind?
Or what plagues you [so much] that you [so boldly] answer [me like this]? 4“I also could speak like you,
If you were in my place;
I could compose and join words together against you
And shake my head at you. 5“[But instead] I could strengthen and encourage you with [the words of] my mouth,
And the consolation and solace of my lips would soothe your suffering and lessen your anguish. Job Says God Shattered Him 6“If I speak [to you miserable comforters], my pain is not relieved;
And if I refrain [from speaking], what [pain or anguish] leaves me? 7“But now God has exhausted me.
You [O Lord] have destroyed all my family and my household. 8“You have taken a firm hold on me and have shriveled me up,
It has become a witness [against me];
And my leanness [and infirmity] rises up [as evidence] against me,
It testifies to my face [about my guilt]. 9“His wrath has torn me and hunted me down,
He has gnashed at me with his teeth;
My adversary sharpens His gaze and glares [with piercing eyes] at me. 10“They have gaped at me with their mouths,
With contempt they have struck me on the cheek;
They massed themselves together [and conspired] against me. 11“God hands me over to criminals
And tosses me [headlong] into the hands of the wicked. 12“I was [living] at ease, but He crushed me and broke me apart,
And He has seized me by the neck and has shaken me to pieces;
He has also set me up as His target. 13“His arrows surround me.
He pierces my kidneys (vital organs) without mercy;
He pours out my gall on the ground. 14“He attacks me, making wound after wound;
He runs at me like a warrior. 15“I have sewed sackcloth over my skin [as a sign of mourning]
And have defiled my horn (symbol of strength) in the dust. 16“My face is red and swollen with weeping,
And on my eyelids is the shadow of death [my eyes are dimmed], 17Although there is no violence or wrongdoing in my hands,
And my prayer is pure. 18“O earth, do not cover my blood,
And let there be no [resting] place for my cry [where it will cease being heard]. 19“Even now, behold, my Witness is in heaven,
And my Advocate [who vouches and testifies for me] is on high. 20“My friends are scoffers [who ridicule];
My eye pours out tears to God. 21“Oh, that a man would mediate and plead with God [for me]
Just as a man [mediates and pleads] with his neighbor and friend. 22“For when a few years are past,
I shall go the way of no return.

Job 17
Job Says He Has Become A Byword
1“My spirit is broken, my days are extinguished,
The grave is ready for me. 2“Surely there are mockers and mockery with me,
And my eye gazes on their obstinacy and provocation. 3“Give me a pledge (guarantee, promise) with Yourself [acknowledge my innocence before my death];
Who is there that will be my guarantor and give security for me? 4“But You [Lord] have closed their hearts to understanding,
Therefore You will not exalt them [by giving a verdict against me]. 5“He who denounces and informs against his friends for a share of the spoil,
The eyes of his children will also languish and fail. 6“But He has made me a byword and mockery among the people,
And I have become one in whose face people spit. 7“My eye has grown dim (unexpressive) because of grief,
And all my [body’s] members are [wasted away] like a shadow. 8“The upright will be [astonished and] appalled at this,
And the innocent will stir himself up against the godless and polluted. 9“Nevertheless the righteous will hold to his ways,
And he who has clean hands will grow stronger and stronger. 10“But as for all of you, come back again,
Even though I do not find a wise man among you. 11“My days are past, my purposes and plans are frustrated and torn apart;
The wishes of my heart [are broken]. 12“These [thoughts try to] make the night into the day;
‘The light is near,’ they say in the presence of darkness [but they pervert the truth]. 13“But if I look to Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) as my home,
If I make my bed in the darkness, 14If I call out to the pit (grave), ‘You are my father’;
And to the worm [that feeds on decay], ‘You are my mother and my sister [because I will soon be closest to you],’ 15Where now is my hope?
And who regards or considers or is even concerned about my hope? 16“Will my hope go down with me to Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead)?
Shall we go down together in the dust?”

Job 18
Bildad Speaks Of The Wicked
1Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said, 2“How long will you hunt for words and continue these speeches?
Do some clear thinking and show understanding and then we can talk. 3“Why are we regarded as beasts,
As if [we are] stupid (senseless) in your eyes? 4“You who tear yourself apart in anger,
Is the earth to be abandoned for your sake,
Or the rock to be moved out of its place? 5“Indeed, the light of the wicked will be put out,
And the flame of his fire will not shine. 6“The light will be dark in his tent,
And his lamp beside him will be put out. 7“The vigorous stride will be shortened,
And his own counsel and the scheme [in which he trusted] will bring his downfall. 8“For the wicked is thrown into a net by his own feet (wickedness),
And he steps on the webbing [of the lattice-covered pit]. 9“A snare catches him by the heel,
And a trap snaps shut on him. 10“A noose is hidden for him on the ground,
And a trap for him on the path. 11“Terrors frighten him on every side
And chase at his heels. 12“The strength [of the wicked] is famished and weakened,
And disaster is ready at his side [if he stops]. 13“His skin is devoured by disease;
The firstborn of death [the worst of diseases] consumes his limbs. 14“He is torn from his tent which he trusted [for safety],
And he is marched and brought to the king of terrors (death). 15“Nothing of his dwells in his tent;
Brimstone (burning sulfur) is scattered over his dwelling [to purify it]. 16“The roots [of the wicked] are dried up below,
And above, his branch is cut off and withers. 17“Memory of him perishes from the earth,
And he has no name on the street. 18“He is driven and propelled from light into darkness,
And chased from the inhabited world. 19“He has no offspring or prosperity among his people,
Nor any survivor where he sojourned. 20“Those in the west are astonished and appalled at his fate,
And those in the east are seized with horror. 21“Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked and the ungodly,
And such is the place of him who does not know or recognize or honor God.”

Job 19
Job Feels Insulted
1Then Job answered and said, 2“How long will you torment and exasperate me
And crush me with words? 3“These ten times you have insulted me;
You are not ashamed to wrong me [and harden your hearts against me]. 4“And if it were true that I have erred,
My error would remain with me [and I would be conscious of it]. 5“If indeed you [braggarts] vaunt and magnify yourselves over me
And prove my disgrace (humiliation) to me, 6Know then that God has wronged me and overthrown me
And has closed His net around me. Everything Is Against Him 7“Behold, I cry out, ‘Violence!’ but I am not heard;
I shout for help, but there is no justice. 8“He has walled up my way so that I cannot pass,
And He has set darkness upon my paths. 9“He has stripped me of my honor
And removed the crown from my head. 10“He breaks me down on every side, and I am gone;
He has uprooted my hope like a tree. 11“He has also kindled His wrath [like a fire] against me
And He considers and counts me as one of His adversaries. 12“His troops come together
And build up their way and siege works against me
And camp around my tent. 13“He has put my brothers far from me,
And my acquaintances are completely estranged from me. 14“My relatives have failed [me],
And my intimate friends have forgotten me. 15“Those who live [temporarily] in my house and my maids consider me a stranger;
I am a foreigner in their sight. 16“I call to my servant, but he does not answer;
I have to implore him with words. 17“My breath is repulsive to my wife,
And I am loathsome to my own brothers. 18“Even young children despise me;
When I get up, they speak against me. 19“All the men of my council hate me;
Those I love have turned against me. 20“My bone clings to my skin and to my flesh,
And I have escaped [death] by the skin of my teeth. 21“Have pity on me! Have pity on me, O you my friends,
For the hand of God has touched me. 22“Why do you persecute me as God does?
Why are you not satisfied with my flesh (anguish)? Job Says, “My Redeemer Lives” 23“Oh, that the words I now speak were written!
Oh, that they were recorded in a scroll! 24“That with an iron stylus and [molten] lead
They were engraved in the rock forever! 25“For I know that my Redeemer and Vindicator lives,
And at the last He will take His stand upon the earth. 26“Even after my [mortal] skin is destroyed [by death],
Yet from my [immortal] flesh I will see God, 27Whom I, even I, will see for myself,
And my eyes will see Him and not another!
My heart faints within me. 28“If you say, ‘How shall we [continue to] persecute him?’
And ‘What pretext for a case against him can we find [since we claim the root of these afflictions is found in him]?’ 29“Then beware and be afraid of the sword [of divine vengeance] for yourselves,
For wrathful are the punishments of that sword,
So that you may know there is judgment.”

Job 20
Zophar Says, “The Triumph Of The Wicked Is Short”
1Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said, 2“Therefore my disquieting thoughts make me answer,
Because of the uneasiness that is within me. 3“I have heard the reproof which insults me,
But the spirit of my understanding makes me answer. 4“Do you not know this from the old days,
Since the time that man was placed on the earth, 5That the triumphing of the wicked is short,
And the joy of the godless is only for a moment? 6“Though his pride reaches the heavens
And his head touches the clouds, 7Yet he perishes forever like his own refuse;
Those who have seen him will say, ‘Where is he?’ 8“He flies away like a dream and cannot be found;
Yes, he is chased away like a vision of the night. 9“The eye which saw him sees him no longer,
Neither does his [accustomed] place behold him any longer. 10“His sons favor the poor [and pay his obligations],
And his hands give back his [ill-gotten] wealth. 11“His bones are full of youthful strength
But it lies down with him in the dust. 12“Though evil and wickedness are sweet in his mouth
And he hides it under his tongue, 13Though he desires it and will not let it go
But holds it in his mouth, 14Yet his food turns [to poison] in his stomach;
It is the venom of vipers within him. 15“He swallows [his ill-gotten] riches,
But will vomit them up;
God will drive them out of his belly. 16“He sucks the poison of vipers [which ill-gotten wealth contains];
The viper’s tongue slays him. 17“He does not look at the rivers,
The flowing streams of honey and butter [to enjoy his wealth]. 18“He gives back what he has labored for and attained
And cannot swallow it [down to enjoy it];
As to the riches of his labor,
He cannot even enjoy them. 19“For he has oppressed and neglected the poor;
He has violently taken away houses which he did not build. 20“Because he knew no quietness or calm within him [because of his greed],
He does not retain anything he desires. 21“There is nothing left of what he devoured;
Therefore his prosperity does not endure. 22“In the fullness of his excess (great abundance) he will be in trouble;
The hand of everyone who suffers will come against him [he is miserable on every side]. 23“When he fills his belly,
God will send His fierce anger on him
And will rain it upon him while he is eating. 24“He may flee from the iron weapon,
But the bow of bronze will pierce him through. 25“The arrow is drawn forth and it comes out of his back [after passing through his body];
Yes, the glittering point comes out of his gall.
Terrors march in upon him; 26Complete darkness (misfortune) is held in reserve for his treasures.
An unfanned fire will devour him;
It will consume the survivor in his tent. 27“The heavens will reveal his wickedness and guilt,
And the earth will rise up against him. 28“The produce and increase of his house will depart [with the victors];
His possessions will be dragged away in the day of God’s wrath. 29“This is the wicked man’s portion from God,
And the heritage decreed and appointed to him by God.”

Job 21
Job’s Dialogue Regarding The Wicked
1Then Job answered and said, 2“Listen carefully to my speech,
And let this be the consolation. 3“Bear with me, and I also will speak;
And after I have spoken, you may [continue to] mock [me]. 4“As for me, is my complaint to man or about him?
And why should I not be impatient and my spirit troubled? 5“Look at me and be astonished and appalled;
And put your hand over your mouth. 6“Even when I remember, I am troubled and afraid;
Horror and trembling take hold of my flesh. 7“Why do the wicked still live,
Become old, and become mighty in power? 8“Their children and descendants are established with them in their sight,
And their offspring before their eyes. 9“Their houses are safe from fear;
And the rod of God is not on them. 10“His bull breeds and does not fail;
His cow calves and does not miscarry. 11“They send forth their little ones like a flock,
And their children skip about. 12“They lift up their voices and sing to the tambourine and the lyre
And rejoice to the sound of the flute. 13“They fully enjoy their days in prosperity,
And so go down to Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) in a [peaceful] moment. 14“Yet they say to God, ‘Depart from us,
For we do not desire the knowledge of Your ways. 15‘Who [and what] is the Almighty, that we should serve Him?
And what would we gain if we plead with Him?’ 16“But notice, the prosperity of the wicked is not in their hand (in their power);
The counsel of the wicked [and the mystery of God’s dealings with the ungodly] is far from my comprehension. 17“How often [then] is it that the lamp of the wicked is put out,
And that their disaster falls on them?
Does God distribute pain and destruction and sorrow [to them] in His anger? 18“Are they like straw before the wind,
And like chaff that the storm steals and carries away? 19“You say, ‘God stores away [the punishment of] man’s wickedness for his children.’
Let God repay him so that he may know and experience it. 20“Let his own eyes see his destruction,
And let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty. 21“For what pleasure does he have in his house and family after he is dead,
When the number of his months [of life] is cut off? 22“Can anyone teach God knowledge,
Seeing that He judges those on high? 23“One dies in his full strength,
Being wholly at ease and quiet and satisfied; 24His pails are full of milk [his sides are filled out with fat],
And the marrow of his bones is moist, 25Whereas another dies with a bitter soul,
Never even tasting pleasure or good fortune. 26“Together they lie down in the dust,
And the worms cover them. 27“Behold, I know your thoughts,
And the plots by which you would wrong me. 28“For you say, ‘Where is the house of the noble man?
And where is the tent, the dwelling place of the wicked?’ 29“Have you not asked those who travel this way,
And do you not recognize their witness? 30“That evil men are [now] reserved for the day of disaster and destruction,
They will be led away on the day of [God’s] wrath? 31“But who will confront him with his actions and rebuke him face to face,
And who will repay him for what he has done? 32“When he is carried to his grave,
A guard will keep watch over his tomb. 33“The [dirt] clods of the valley are sweet to him [and gently cover him],
Moreover, all men will follow after him [to a grave],
While countless ones go before him. 34“How then can you vainly comfort me with empty words,
Since your answers remain untrue?”

Job 22
Eliphaz Accuses And Exhorts Job
1Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 2“Can a vigorous man be of use to God,
Or a wise man be useful to himself? 3“Is it any pleasure or joy to the Almighty that you are righteous?
Or is it of benefit to Him that you make your ways perfect? 4“Is it because of your fear of Him that He corrects you,
That He enters into judgment against you? 5“Is not your wickedness great,
And your sins without end? 6“For you have taken pledges of your brothers without cause,
And stripped men naked. 7“You have not given water to the weary to drink,
And you have withheld bread from the hungry. 8“But the land is possessed by the man with power,
And the favored and honorable man dwells in it. 9“You have sent widows away empty-handed,
And the arms (strength) of the fatherless have been broken. 10“Therefore snares surround you,
And sudden dread terrifies and overwhelms you; 11Or darkness, so that you cannot see,
And a flood of water covers you. 12“Is not God in the height of heaven?
And behold the distant stars, how high they are! 13“You say, ‘What does God know [about me]?
Can He judge through the thick darkness? 14‘Thick clouds are a hiding place for Him, so that He cannot see,
And He walks on the vault (circle) of the heavens.’ 15“Will you keep to the ancient path
That wicked men walked [in the time of Noah], 16Men who were snatched away before their time,
Whose foundations were poured out like a river? 17“They said to God, ‘Depart from us!
What can the Almighty do for us or to us?’ 18“Yet He filled their houses with good things;
But the counsel of the wicked and ungodly is far from me. 19“The righteous see it and are glad;
And the innocent mock and laugh at them, saying, 20‘Surely our adversaries are cut off and destroyed,
And fire has consumed their abundance.’ 21“Now yield and submit yourself to Him [agree with God and be conformed to His will] and be at peace;
In this way [you will prosper and great] good will come to you. 22“Please receive the law and instruction from His mouth
And establish His words in your heart and keep them. 23“If you return to the Almighty [and submit and humble yourself before Him], you will be built up [and restored];
If you remove unrighteousness far from your tents, 24And place your gold in the dust,
And the gold of Ophir among the stones of the brooks [considering it of little value], 25And make the Almighty your gold
And your precious silver, 26Then you will have delight in the Almighty,
And you will lift up your face to God. 27“You will pray to Him, and He will hear you,
And you will pay your vows. 28“You will also decide and decree a thing, and it will be established for you;
And the light [of God’s favor] will shine upon your ways. 29“When you are cast down and humbled, you will speak with confidence,
And the humble person He will lift up and save. 30“He will even rescue the one [for whom you intercede] who is not innocent;
And he will be rescued through the cleanness of your hands.”

Job 23
Job Says He Longs For God
1Then Job answered and said, 2“Even today my complaint is contentious;
His hand is heavy despite my groaning. 3“Oh, that I knew where I might find Him,
That I might [even] come to His seat! 4“I would present my cause before Him
And fill my mouth with arguments. 5“I would learn the words which He would answer,
And understand what He would say to me. 6“Would He contend against me with His great power?
No, surely He would give attention to me. 7“There the righteous and upright could reason with Him;
So I would be acquitted forever by my Judge. 8“Behold, I go forward (to the east), but He is not there;
I go backward (to the west), but I cannot perceive Him; 9To the left (north) He turns, but I cannot behold Him;
He turns to the right hand (south), but I cannot see Him. 10“But He knows the way that I take [and He pays attention to it].
When He has tried me, I will come forth as [refined] gold [pure and luminous]. 11“My feet have carefully followed His steps;
I have kept His ways and not turned aside. 12“I have not departed from the commandment of His lips;
I have kept the words of His mouth more than my necessary food. 13“But He is unique and unchangeable, and who can turn Him?
And what His soul desires, that He does. 14“For He performs what is planned (appointed) for me,
And He is mindful of many such things. 15“Therefore I would be terrified at His presence;
When I consider [all of this], I tremble in dread of Him. 16“For God has made my heart faint,
And the Almighty has terrified me, 17But I am not silenced by the darkness [of these woes that fell on me],
Nor by the thick darkness which covers my face.

Job 24
Job Says God Seems To Ignore Wrongs
1“Why does the Almighty not set seasons for judgment?
Why do those who know Him not see His days [for punishment of the wicked]? 2“Some remove the landmarks;
They [violently] seize and pasture flocks [appropriating land and flocks openly]. 3“They drive away the donkeys of the orphans;
They take the widow’s ox for a pledge. 4“They crowd the needy off the road;
The poor of the land all hide themselves. 5“Behold, as wild donkeys in the desert,
The poor go to their work, diligently seeking food;
As bread for their children in the desert. 6“They harvest their fodder in a field [that is not their own],
And glean the vineyard of the wicked. 7“They spend the night naked, without clothing,
And have no covering against the cold. 8“They are wet from the rain of the mountains
And cling to the rock for lack of shelter. 9“Others snatch the fatherless [infants] from the breast [to sell or make them slaves],
And against the poor they take a pledge [of clothing]. 10“They cause the poor to go about naked without clothing,
And they take away the sheaves [of grain] from the hungry. 11“Within the walls [of the wicked] the poor make [olive] oil;
They tread [the grapes in] the wine presses, but thirst. 12“From the [populous and crowded] city men groan,
And the souls of the wounded cry out for help;
Yet God [seemingly] does not pay attention to the wrong [done to them]. 13“Others have been with those who rebel against the light;
They do not want to know its ways
Nor stay in its paths. 14“The murderer rises at dawn;
He kills the poor and the needy,
And at night he becomes a thief. 15“The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight,
Saying, ‘No eye will see me,’
And he covers his face. 16“In the dark they dig into [the penetrable walls of] houses;
They shut themselves up by day;
They do not know the light [of day]. 17“For the morning is the same to him as the thick darkness [of midnight];
For he is familiar with the terrors of thick darkness. 18“They are insignificant on the surface of the water;
Their portion is cursed on the earth;
They do not turn toward the vineyards. 19“Drought and heat consume the snow waters;
So does Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) [consume] those who have sinned. 20“A mother will forget him;
The worm feeds on him until he is no longer remembered.
And wickedness will be broken like a tree [which cannot be restored]. 21“He preys on the barren (childless) woman
And does no good for the widow. 22“Yet God draws away the mighty by His power;
He rises, but no one has assurance of life. 23“God gives them security, and they are supported;
And His eyes are on their ways. 24“They are exalted for a little while, and then they are gone;
Moreover, they are brought low and like everything [they are] gathered up and taken out of the way;
Even like the heads of grain they are cut off. 25“And if this is not so, who can prove me a liar
And make my speech worthless?”

Job 25
Bildad Says Man Is Inferior
1Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said, 2“Dominion and awe belong to God;
He establishes peace and order in His high places. 3“Is there any number to His [vast celestial] armies?
And upon whom does His light not rise? 4“How then can man be justified and righteous with God?
Or how can he who is born of a woman be pure and clean? 5“Behold, even the moon has no brightness [compared to God’s majesty and glory]
And the stars are not pure in His sight, 6How much less man, that maggot,
And the son of man, that worm!”

Job 26
Job Rebukes Bildad
1But Job answered and said, 2“What a help you are to the weak (powerless)!
How you have saved the arm that is without strength! 3“How you have counseled the one who has no wisdom!
And how abundantly you have provided sound wisdom and helpful insight! 4“To whom have you uttered [these] words?
And whose spirit [inspired what] came forth from you? The Greatness of God 5“The spirits of the dead tremble
Underneath the waters and their inhabitants. 6“Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) is naked before God,
And Abaddon (the place of destruction) has no covering [from His eyes]. 7“It is He who spreads out the north over emptiness
And hangs the earth on nothing. 8“He wraps the waters in His clouds [which otherwise would spill on earth all at once],
And the cloud does not burst under them. 9“He covers the face of the full moon
And spreads His cloud over it. 10“He has inscribed a circular limit (the horizon) on the face of the waters
At the boundary between light and darkness. 11“The pillars of the heavens tremble
And are terrified at His rebuke. 12“He stirred up the sea by His power,
And by His understanding He smashed [proud] Rahab. 13“By His breath the heavens are cleared;
His hand has pierced the [swiftly] fleeing serpent. 14“Yet these are just the fringes of His ways [mere samples of His power],
The faintest whisper of His voice!
Who can contemplate the thunder of His [full] mighty power?”

Job 27
Job Affirms His Righteousness
1Job continued his discourse and said, 2“As God lives, who has taken away my right and denied me justice,
And the Almighty, who has caused bitterness and grief for my soul, 3As long as my life is within me,
And the breath of God is [still] in my nostrils, 4My lips will not speak unjustly,
Nor will my tongue utter deceit. 5“Far be it from me that I should admit you are right [in your accusations against me];
Until I die, I will not remove my integrity from me. 6“I hold fast my uprightness and my right standing with God and I will not let them go;
My heart does not reproach me for any of my days. The State of the Godless 7“May my enemy be as the wicked,
And he who rises up against me be as the unrighteous (unjust). 8“For what is the hope of the godless, even though he has gained [in this world],
When God takes his life? 9“Will God hear his cry
When trouble and distress come upon him? 10“Will he take delight in the Almighty?
Will he call on God at all times? 11“I will teach you regarding the hand (power) of God;
I will not conceal what is with the Almighty [God’s actual treatment of the wicked]. 12“Behold, all of you have seen it;
Why then do you act vainly and foolishly [cherishing worthless concepts]? 13“This [which I am about to explain] is the portion of a wicked man from God,
And the inheritance which tyrants and oppressors receive from the Almighty: 14“Though his children are many, they are destined for the sword;
And his descendants will not have sufficient bread. 15“Those who survive him will be buried because of the plague,
And [their] widows will not be able to weep. 16“Though he heaps up silver like dust
And piles up clothing like clay, 17He may prepare it, but the just will wear it
And the innocent will divide the silver. 18“He builds his house like a spider’s web,
Like a (temporary) hut which a watchman makes. 19“He lies down rich, but never will again;
He opens his eyes, and it is gone. 20“Terrors overtake him like a [suddenly rising] flood;
A windstorm steals him away in the night. 21“The east wind lifts him up, and he is gone;
It sweeps him out of his place. 22“For it will hurl [thunderbolts of God’s wrath] at him unsparingly and without compassion;
He flees in haste from its power. 23“People will clap their hands at him [to mock and ridicule him]
And hiss him out of his place.

Job 28
Job Tells Of Earth’s Treasures
1“Surely there is a mine for silver,
And a place where they refine gold. 2“Iron is taken out of the earth,
And copper is smelted from the stone ore. 3“Man puts an end to darkness [by bringing in a light],
And to the farthest bounds he searches out
The rock buried in gloom and deep shadow. 4“He breaks open (mine) shafts far away from where people live,
[In places] forgotten by the [human] foot;
They dangle [in the mines] and hang away from men. 5“[As for] the earth, out of it comes food,
But underneath [its surface, down deep] it is turned over as fire. 6“Its stones are the bed of sapphires;
It holds dust of gold. 7“The path [deep within] no bird of prey knows,
And the falcon’s eye has not caught sight of it. 8“The proud beasts [and their young] have not walked on it,
Nor has the fierce lion passed over it. 9“Man puts his hand on [and tears apart] the flinty rock;
He overturns the mountains at the base [looking for treasure]. 10“He cuts out channels and passages among the rocks;
And his eye sees every precious thing. 11“Man dams up the streams from flowing [so that they do not trickle into the mine],
And what is hidden he brings out to the light. The Search for Wisdom Is Harder 12“But where can wisdom be found?
And where is the place of understanding? 13“Man does not know the value of it;
Nor is it found in the land of the living. 14“The deep says, ‘It is not in me’;
And the sea says, ‘It is not with me.’ 15“It cannot be obtained for pure gold,
Nor can silver be weighed as its price. 16“It cannot be valued in [terms of] the gold of Ophir,
In the precious onyx or beryl, or the sapphire. 17“Gold and glass cannot equal wisdom,
Nor can it be exchanged for articles of fine gold. 18“No mention of coral and crystal can be made;
For the possession of wisdom is even above [that of] rubies or pearls. 19“The topaz of Ethiopia cannot compare with it,
Nor can it be valued in pure gold. 20“From where then does wisdom come?
And where is the place of understanding? 21“It is hidden from the eyes of all the living
And concealed from the birds of the heavens. 22“Abaddon (the place of destruction) and Death say,
‘We have [only] heard a report of it with our ears.’ 23“God understands the way [to wisdom]
And He knows its place [for wisdom is with God alone]. 24“For He looks to the ends of the earth
And sees everything under the heavens. 25“When He gave weight and pressure to the wind
And allotted the waters by measure, 26When He made a limit for the rain
And a way for the thunderbolt, 27Then He saw wisdom and declared it;
He established it and searched it out. 28“But to man He said, ‘Behold, the reverential and worshipful fear of the Lord—that is wisdom;
And to depart from evil is understanding.’”

Job 29
Job’s Past Was Glorious
1And Job again took up his discussion and said, 2“Oh, that I were as in the months of old,
As in the days when God watched over me, 3When His lamp shone upon my head
And by His light I walked through darkness; 4As I was in the prime of my days,
When the friendship and counsel of God were over my tent, 5When the Almighty was still with me
And my boys were around me, 6When my steps [through rich pastures] were washed with butter and cream [from my livestock],
And the rock poured out for me streams of oil [from my olive groves]. 7“When I went out to the gate of the city,
When I took my seat [as a city father] in the square, 8The young men saw me and hid themselves,
The aged arose and stood [respectfully]; 9The princes stopped talking
And put their hands on their mouths; 10The voices of the nobles were hushed,
And their tongues stuck to the roof of their mouths. 11“For when an ear heard [my name mentioned], it called me happy and fortunate;
And when an eye saw [me], it testified for me [approvingly], 12Because I rescued the poor who cried for help,
And the orphan who had no helper. 13“The blessing of him who was about to perish came upon me,
And I made the widow’s heart sing for joy. 14“I put on righteousness, and it clothed me;
My justice was like a robe and a turban! 15“I was eyes to the blind
And I was feet to the lame. 16“I was a father to the needy;
I investigated the case I did not know [and assured justice]. 17“And I smashed the jaws of the wicked
And snatched the prey from his teeth. 18“Then I said, ‘I shall die in my nest,
And I shall multiply my days as the sand. 19‘My root is spread out and open to the waters,
And the dew lies all night upon my branch. 20‘My glory and honor are fresh in me [being constantly renewed],
And my bow gains [ever] new strength in my hand.’ 21“They listened to me and waited
And kept silent for my counsel. 22“After I spoke, they did not speak again,
And my speech dropped upon them [like a refreshing shower]. 23“They waited for me [and for my words] as for the rain,
And they opened their mouths as for the spring rain. 24“I smiled at them when they did not believe,
And they did not diminish the light of my face. 25“I chose a way for them and sat as chief,
And dwelt as a king among his soldiers,
As one who comforts mourners.

Job 30
Job’s Present State Is Humiliating
1“But now those younger than I mock and laugh at me,
Whose fathers I refused to put with the sheepdogs of my flock. 2“Indeed, how could the strength of their hands profit me?
Vigor had perished from them. 3“They are gaunt with want and famine;
They gnaw the dry and barren ground by night in [the gloom of] waste and desolation. 4“They pluck [and eat] saltwort (mallows) among the bushes,
And their food is the root of the broom shrub. 5“They are driven from the community;
They shout after them as after a thief. 6“They must dwell on the slopes of wadis
And in holes in the ground and in rocks. 7“Among the bushes they cry out [like wild animals];
Beneath the prickly scrub they gather and huddle together. 8“They are the sons of [worthless and nameless] fools,
They have been driven out of the land. 9“And now I have become [the subject of] their taunting;
Yes, I am a byword and a laughingstock to them. 10“They hate me, they stand aloof from me,
And do not refrain from spitting in my face. 11“For God has loosed His bowstring [attacking me] and [He has] afflicted and humbled me;
They have cast off the bridle [of restraint] before me. 12“On my right the [rabble] brood rises;
They push my feet away, and they build up their ways of destruction against me [like an advancing army]. 13“They break up and clutter my path [upsetting my plans],
They profit from my destruction;
No one restrains them. 14“As through a wide breach they come,
Amid the crash [of falling walls] they roll on [over me]. 15“Terrors are turned upon me;
They chase away my honor and reputation like the wind,
And my prosperity has passed away like a cloud. 16“And now my soul is poured out within me;
The days of affliction have seized me. 17“My bones are pierced [with aching] in the night season,
And the pains that gnaw me take no rest. 18“By the great force [of my disease] my garment (skin) is disfigured and blemished;
It binds about me [choking me] like the collar of my coat. 19“God has cast me into the mire [a swampland of crisis],
And I have become [worthless] like dust and ashes. 20“I cry to You for help, [Lord,] but You do not answer me;
I stand up, but You [only] gaze [indifferently] at me. 21“You have become harsh and cruel to me;
With the might of Your hand You [keep me alive only to] persecute me. 22“You lift me up on the wind and cause me to ride [upon it];
And You toss me about in the tempest and dissolve me in the storm. 23“For I know that You will bring me to death
And to the house of meeting [appointed] for all the living. 24“However, does not one falling in a heap of ruins stretch out his hand?
Or in his disaster [will he not] therefore cry out for help? 25“Did I not weep for one whose life was hard and filled with trouble?
Was not my heart grieved for the needy? 26“When I expected good, then came evil [to me];
And when I waited for light, then came darkness. 27“I am seething within and my heart is troubled and cannot rest;
Days of affliction come to meet me. 28“I go about mourning without comfort [my skin blackened by disease, not by the heat of the sun];
I stand up in the assembly and cry out for help. 29“I am a brother to [howling] jackals,
And a companion to ostriches [which scream dismally]. 30“My skin falls from me in blackened flakes,
And my bones are burned with fever. 31“Therefore my lyre (harp) is used for [the sound of] mourning,
And my flute for the [sound of the] voices of those who weep.

Job 31
Job Asserts His Integrity
1“I have made a covenant (agreement) with my eyes;
How then could I gaze [lustfully] at a virgin? 2“For what is the portion I would have from God above,
And what heritage from the Almighty on high? 3“Does not tragedy fall [justly] on the unjust
And disaster to those who work wickedness? 4“Does not God see my ways
And count all my steps? 5“If I have walked with falsehood,
Or if my foot has chased after deceit, 6Oh, let Him weigh me with accurate scales,
And let God know my integrity. 7“If my step has turned away from the way [of God],
Or if my heart has [covetously] followed my eyes,
Or if any spot [of guilt] has stained my hands, 8Then let me plant and [let] another eat [from the results of my labor],
And let my crops be uprooted and ruined. 9“If my heart has been enticed and I was made a fool by a woman,
Or if I have [covetously] lurked at my neighbor’s door [until his departure], 10Let my wife grind [meal, like a bond slave] for another [man],
And let others kneel down over her. 11“For adultery is a heinous and lustful crime;
Moreover, it would be a sin punishable by the judges. 12“For it is a fire which consumes to Abaddon (destruction, ruin, final torment);
And [illicit passion] would burn and rage and uproot all my [life’s] increase [destroying everything]. 13“If I have despised and rejected the claim of my male or female servants
When they filed a complaint against me, 14What then could I do when God arises [to judge me]?
When He calls me to account, what will I answer Him? 15“Did not He who made me in the womb make my servant,
And did not the same One fashion us both in the womb? 16“If I have withheld from the poor what they desired,
Or have caused the eyes of the widow to look in vain [for relief], 17Or have eaten my morsel [of food] alone,
And did not share it with the orphan 18(But from my youth the orphan grew up with me as with a father,
And from my mother’s womb I have been the widow’s guide), 19If I have seen anyone perish for lack of clothing,
Or any poor person without covering, 20If his loins have not thanked and blessed me [for clothing them],
And if he was not warmed with the fleece of my sheep, 21If I have lifted my hand against the orphan,
Because I saw [that the judges would be] my help at the [council] gate, 22Then let my shoulder fall away from its socket,
And my arm be broken off at the elbow. 23“For tragedy from God is a terror to me,
And because of His majesty and exaltation I can do nothing [nor endure facing Him]. 24“If I have put my trust and confidence in gold,
Or have declared fine gold my hope and assurance, 25If I gloated and rejoiced because my wealth was great,
And because my [powerful] hand [alone] had obtained so much, 26If I beheld the sun [as an object of worship] when it shone
Or the moon going in its splendor, 27And my heart became secretly enticed [by them],
And my hand threw a kiss from my mouth [in respect to them], 28This also would have been [a heinous] sin calling for judgment,
For I would have denied God above. 29“Have I rejoiced at the destruction of the enemy [who hated me],
Or exulted [in malicious triumph] when evil overtook him? 30“No, I have not allowed my mouth to sin
By cursing my enemy and asking for his life. 31“I assure you, the men of my tent have said,
‘Who can find one [in need] who has not been satisfied with his meat’? 32“The stranger has not lodged in the street,
Because I have opened my door to the traveler. 33“Have I concealed my transgressions like Adam or like other men,
By hiding my wickedness in my bosom, 34Because I feared the great multitude,
And the contempt of families terrified me,
So that I kept silence and did not acknowledge my sin and did not go out of the door? 35“Oh, that I had one to listen to me!
Look, here is my signature (mark);
Let the Almighty answer me!
Let my adversary write out His indictment [and put His vague accusations in tangible form]. 36“Surely I would [proudly] bear it on my shoulder,
And bind the scroll around my head like a crown. 37“I would count out to Him the number of my steps [with every detail of my life],
Approaching His presence as if I were a prince. 38“For if my land has cried out against me,
And its furrows weep together; 39If I have eaten its fruits without paying for them,
Or have caused its [rightful] owners to lose their lives, 40Let thorns grow instead of wheat,
And stinkweed and cockleburs instead of barley.”So the words of Job [with his friends] are finished.

Job 32
Elihu Rebukes Job
1So these three men ceased answering Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes [and could not be persuaded otherwise by them]. 2But Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, became indignant. His indignation was kindled and burned and he became upset with Job because he justified himself rather than God [and even expressed doubts about God’s character]. 3Elihu’s anger burned against Job’s three friends because they had found no answer [and were unable to determine Job’s error], and yet they had condemned Job and declared him to be in the wrong [and responsible for his own afflictions]. 4Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job because the others were years older than he. 5And when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouths of these three men, he burned with anger.
6Then Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite said, “I am young, and you are aged;
For that reason I was anxious and dared not tell you what I think. 7“I thought age should speak,
And a multitude of years should teach wisdom. 8“But there is [a vital force and] a spirit [of intelligence] in man,
And the breath of the Almighty gives them understanding. 9“Those [who are] abundant in years may not [always] be wise,
Nor may the elders [always] understand justice. 10“Therefore I say, ‘Listen to me;
I also will give you my opinion [about Job’s situation] and tell you plainly what I think.’ 11“You see, I waited for your words,
I listened to your [wise] reasons,
While you pondered and searched out what to say. 12“I even paid close attention to [what] you [said],
Indeed, not one of you convinced Job [nor could you refute him],
Not one of you supplied [satisfactory] answers to his words. 13“Beware if you say,
‘We have found wisdom;
God thrusts Job down [justly], not man [for God alone is dealing with him].’ 14“Now Job has not directed his words against me [therefore I have no reason to be offended],
Nor will I answer him with arguments like yours. [I speak for truth, not for revenge.] 15“They (Job’s friends) are dismayed and embarrassed, they no longer answer;
The words have moved away and failed them,” [says Elihu]. 16“And shall I wait, because they say nothing,
But stand still and say no more? 17“I too will give my share of answers;
I too will express my opinion and share my knowledge. 18“For I am full of words;
The spirit within me constrains me. 19“My belly is like unvented wine;
Like new wineskins it is about to burst. 20“I must speak so that I may get relief;
I will open my lips and answer. 21“I will not [I warn you] be partial to any man [that is, let my respect for you mitigate what I say];
Nor flatter any man. 22“For I do not know how to flatter, [in an appropriate way, and I fear that],
My Maker would soon take me away.

Job 33
Elihu Claims To Speak For God
1“However, Job, please listen to my words,
And pay attention to everything I say. 2“Behold, I have opened my mouth [to begin my speech];
My tongue in my mouth is going to speak. 3“My words will express the uprightness of my heart,
And my lips will speak what they know with utter sincerity. 4“The Spirit of God has made me,
And the breath of the Almighty gives me life [which inspires me]. 5“Answer me, if you can;
Set yourselves before me, take your stand. 6“Behold, I belong to God like you;
I too was formed out of the clay. 7“Behold, I will not make you afraid or terrified of me [for I am only mortal and not God],
Nor should any pressure from me weigh heavily upon you. 8“Surely you have spoken in my hearing,
And I have heard the sound of your words, saying: 9‘I am pure, without transgression;
I am innocent and there is no guilt in me. 10‘Behold, God finds pretexts against me;
He counts me as His enemy. 11‘He puts my feet in the stocks [to hinder and humiliate me];
He [suspiciously] watches all my paths,’ [you say]. 12“Look, let me answer you, in this you are not right or just;
For God is greater and far superior to man. 13“Why do you complain against Him?
That He does not answer [you with] all His doings. 14“For God speaks once,
And even twice, yet no one notices it [including you, Job]. 15“In a dream, a vision of the night [one may hear God’s voice],
When deep sleep falls on men
While slumbering upon the bed, 16Then He opens the ears of men
And seals their instruction, 17That He may turn man aside from his conduct,
And keep him from pride; 18He holds back his soul from the pit [of destruction],
And his life from passing over into Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead). 19“Man is also disciplined with pain on his bed,
And with unceasing complaint in his bones, 20So that his life makes him loathe food,
And his soul [loathe] even his favorite dishes. 21“His flesh is so wasted away that it cannot be seen,
And his bones which were not seen now stick out. 22“Then his soul draws near to the pit [of destruction],
And his life to those who bring death (the destroyers). 23“If there is an angel as a mediator for him,
One out of a thousand,
To explain to a man what is right for him [that is, how to be in right standing with God], 24Then the angel is gracious to him, and says,
‘Spare him from going down to the pit [of destruction];
I have found a ransom [a consideration, or reason for redemption, an atonement]!’ 25“Let his flesh be restored and become fresher than in youth;
Let him return to the days of his youthful strength. 26“He will pray to God, and He shall be favorable to him,
So that he looks at His face with joy;
For God restores to man His righteousness [that is, his right standing with God—with its joys]. 27“He sings out to other men,
‘I have sinned and perverted that which was right,
And it was not proper for me! 28‘God has redeemed my life from going to the pit [of destruction],
And my life shall see the light.’” 29[Elihu comments,] “Behold, God does all these things twice, yes, three times, with a man, 30To bring his life back from the pit [of destruction],
That he may be enlightened with the light of the living. 31“Pay attention, Job, listen to me;
Keep silent, and I will speak. 32“If you have anything to say, answer me;
Speak, for I desire to justify you. 33“If not [and you have nothing to say], listen to me;
Keep silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”

Job 34
Elihu Vindicates God’s Justice
1Elihu continued his discourse and said, 2“Hear my words, you wise men,
And listen to me, you who have [so much] knowledge. 3“For the ear puts words to the test
As the palate tastes food. 4“Let us choose for ourselves that which is right;
Let us know among ourselves what is good. 5“For Job has said, ‘I am righteous [and innocent],
But God has taken away my right; 6Although I am right, I am accounted a liar.
My wound is incurable, though I am without transgression.’ 7“What man is like Job,
Who drinks up derision like water, 8Who goes in company with those who do evil
And walks with wicked men? 9“For he has said, ‘It profits a man nothing
When he takes delight and is pleased with God and obeys Him.’ 10“Therefore hear me, you men of understanding.
Far be it from God that He would do wickedness,
And from the Almighty to do wrong. 11“For God pays a man according to his work,
And He will make every man find [appropriate] compensation according to his way. 12“Surely God will not act wickedly,
Nor will the Almighty pervert justice. 13“Who put God in charge over the earth?
And who has laid on Him the whole world? 14“If God should determine to do so,
If He should gather to Himself [that is, withdraw from man] His [life-giving] spirit and His breath, 15All flesh would perish together,
And man would return to dust. 16“If you now have understanding, hear this;
Listen to the sound of my words. 17“Shall one who hates justice [and is an enemy of right] govern?
And will you condemn Him who is just and mighty? 18“God who says to a king, ‘You are worthless and vile,’
Or to princes and nobles, ‘You are wicked and evil’? 19“Who is not partial to princes,
Nor does He regard the rich above the poor,
For they all are the work of His hands. 20“In a moment they die, even at midnight
The people are shaken and pass away,
And the powerful are taken away without a [human] hand. 21“For God’s eyes are on the ways of a man,
And He sees all his steps. 22“There is no darkness nor deep shadow
Where the evildoers may hide themselves. 23“For He sets no appointed time for a man,
That he should appear before Him in judgment. 24“He breaks mighty men without inquiry,
And sets others in their place. 25“Therefore He knows of their works,
And He overthrows them in the night,
So that they are crushed and destroyed. 26“He strikes them like the wicked
In a public place, 27Because they turned aside from following Him
And would not consider or show regard for any of His ways, 28So that they caused the cry of the poor to come to Him,
And He heard the cry of the afflicted. 29“When He keeps quiet, who then can condemn?
When He hides His face [withdrawing His favor and help], who then can behold Him [and make supplication to Him],
Whether it be a nation or a man by himself?— 30So that godless men would not rule
Nor be snares for the people. 31“For has anyone said to God,
‘I have endured my chastisement;
I will not offend anymore; 32Teach me what I do not see [in regard to how I have sinned];
If I have done wrong (injustice, unrighteousness),
I will not do it again’? 33“Shall God’s retribution [for your sins] be on your terms, because you refuse to accept it?
For you must do the choosing, and not I;
Therefore say what you [truthfully] know. 34“Men of understanding will tell me,
Indeed, every wise man who hears me [will agree], 35‘Job speaks without knowledge,
And his words are without wisdom and insight. 36‘Job ought to be tried to the limit
Because he answers like wicked men! 37‘For he adds rebellion [in his unsubmissive, defiant attitude toward God] to his [unacknowledged] sin;
He claps his hands among us [in open mockery and contempt of God],
And he multiplies his words [of accusation] against God.’”

Job 35
Elihu Sharply Reproves Job
1Elihu continued speaking [to Job] and said, 2“Do you think this is according to [your] justice?
Do you say, ‘My righteousness is more than God’s’? 3“For you say, ‘What advantage have you [by living a righteous life]?
What profit will I have, more [by being righteous] than if I had sinned?’ 4“I will answer you,
And your companions with you. 5“Look to the heavens and see;
And behold the skies which are [much] higher than you. 6“If you have sinned, what do you accomplish against Him?
And if your transgressions are multiplied, what have you done to Him? 7“If you are righteous, what do you give God,
Or what does He receive from your hand? 8“Your wickedness affects only a man such as you,
And your righteousness affects only a son of man [but it cannot affect God, who is sovereign]. 9“Because of the multitudes of oppressions the people cry out;
They cry for help because of the [violent] arm of the mighty. 10“But no one says, ‘Where is God my Maker,
Who gives songs [of rejoicing] in the night, 11Who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth
And makes us wiser than the birds of the heavens?’ 12“The people cry out, but He does not answer
Because of the pride of evil men. 13“Surely God will not listen to an empty cry [which lacks trust],
Nor will the Almighty regard it. 14“Even though you say that you do not see Him [when missing His righteous judgment on earth],
Yet your case is before Him, and you must wait for Him! 15“And now, because He has not [quickly] punished in His anger,
Nor has He acknowledged transgression and arrogance well [and seems unaware of the wrong of which a person is guilty], 16Job uselessly opens his mouth
And multiplies words without knowledge [drawing the worthless conclusion that the righteous have no more advantage than the wicked].”

Job 36
Elihu Speaks Of God’s Dealings With Men
1Elihu continued and said, 2“Bear with me a little longer, and I will show you,
That there is yet more to say on God’s behalf. 3“I will bring my knowledge from afar,
And will ascribe righteousness to my Maker. 4“For truly my words are not false;
He who is perfect in knowledge is with you. 5“Behold, God is mighty, and yet does not despise anyone [nor regard any as trivial];
He is mighty in the strength and power of understanding. 6“He does not prolong the life of the wicked,
But gives the afflicted their justice. 7“He does not withdraw His eyes from the righteous [those in right standing with Him];
But with kings upon the throne
He has seated them forever, and they are exalted. 8“And if they are bound in bonds [of adversity],
And held by cords of affliction, 9Then He declares to them [the true character of] their deeds
And their transgressions, that they have acted arrogantly [with presumption and notions of self-sufficiency]. 10“He opens their ears to instruction and discipline,
And commands that they return from evil. 11“If they hear and serve Him,
They will end their days in prosperity
And their years in pleasantness and joy. 12“But if they do not hear and obey, they will die by the sword [of God’s destructive judgments]
And they will die [in ignorance] without [true] knowledge. 13“But the godless in heart store up anger [at the divine discipline];
They do not cry [to Him] for help when He binds them [with cords of affliction]. 14“They die in youth,
And their life ends among the cult prostitutes. 15“He rescues the afflicted in their affliction,
And opens their ears [so that they pay attention to His voice] in times of oppression. 16“Then indeed, He enticed you from the mouth of distress and confinement,
Into a broad place where there is no constraint or distress;
And that which was set on your table was full of fatness (rich food). 17“But you [Job] were full of judgment on the wicked,
Judgment and justice take hold of you. 18“Do not let wrath entice you into scoffing;
And do not let the greatness and the extent of the ransom turn you aside. 19“Will your wealth [be sufficient to] keep you from [the confinement of] distress,
Or will all the force of your strength do it? 20“Do not long for the night,
When people vanish from their places. 21“Take heed and be careful, do not turn to wickedness,
For you have chosen this [the vice of complaining against God] rather than [learning from] affliction. 22“Behold, God is exalted in His power;
Who is a ruler or a teacher like Him? 23“Who has appointed God His way,
And who can say [to Him], ‘You have done wrong’? 24“Remember that you should magnify God’s work,
Of which men have sung. 25“All men have seen God’s work;
Man looks at it from a distance. 26“Behold, God is exalted, and we do not know Him;
The number of His years is unsearchable. 27“For He draws up the drops of water,
They distill rain from the mist, 28Which the clouds pour down,
They drop abundantly upon mankind.” 29“Can anyone understand the spreading of the clouds
Or the thundering of His pavilion? 30“Behold, He spreads His lightning around Him [against the dark clouds],
And He covers the depths of the sea. 31“For by these [mighty acts] He judges the peoples;
He gives food in abundance. 32“He covers His hands with the lightning,
And commands it to strike the mark. 33“His thundering voice declares [awesomely] His presence;
The cattle also are told of His coming storm.

Job 37
Elihu Says God Has Authority Over The Storm
1“Indeed, at His thundering my heart trembles
And leaps out of its place. 2“Listen carefully to the thunder of His voice,
And the rumbling that goes out of His mouth! 3“He lets it loose under the whole heaven,
And His lightning to the ends of the earth. 4“After it, His voice roars;
He thunders with the voice of His majesty,
And He does not restrain His lightning [against His adversaries] when His voice is heard. 5“God thunders marvelously with His voice;
He does great things which we cannot comprehend. 6“For He says to the snow, ‘Fall on the earth’;
And [He speaks] to the showers and to the downpour [of His mighty rains], ‘Be strong.’ 7“God seals (brings to a standstill, stops) [by severe weather] the hand of every man,
That all men [whom He has made] may know His work [that is, His sovereign power and their subjection to it]. 8“Then the beast goes into its lair
And remains in its hiding place. 9“Out of its chamber comes the storm,
And cold from the north wind. 10“Ice is made by the breath of God,
And the expanse of the waters is frozen. 11“He loads the thick cloud with moisture;
He disperses the cloud of His lightning. 12“Its direction is turned around by His guidance,
That it may do whatever He commands it
On the face of the inhabited earth. 13“Whether [it be] for correction, or for His earth [generally]
Or for [His] mercy and lovingkindness, He causes it to happen. 14“Listen to this, Job;
Stand still and consider the wonders of God. 15“Do you know how God establishes and commands them,
And makes the lightning of His [storm] cloud shine? 16“Do you know about the layers of thick clouds [and how they are balanced and poised in the heavens],
The wonderful works of Him who is perfect in knowledge, 17You whose garments are hot,
When He quiets the earth [in sultry summer] with the [oppressive] south wind? 18“Can you, with Him, spread out the sky,
Strong as a molten mirror? 19“Tell us [Job] what words [of man] shall we say to such a Being;
We cannot state our case because of darkness [that is, our ignorance in the presence of the unsearchable God]. 20“So shall it be told Him that I wish to speak?
Or should a man say that he would be swallowed up [and destroyed by God]? 21“Now people cannot look at the light when it is bright in the skies [without being blinded],
When the wind has passed and cleared them. 22“Out of the north comes golden splendor [and people can hardly look on it];
Around God is awesome splendor and majesty [far too glorious for man’s eyes]. 23“The Almighty—we cannot find Him;
He is exalted in power
And He will not do violence to [nor disregard] justice and abundant righteousness. 24“Men therefore fear Him;
He does not regard nor respect any who are wise in heart [in their own understanding and conceit].”

Job 38
God Speaks Now To Job
1Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind and said, 2“Who is this that darkens counsel [questioning my authority and wisdom]
By words without knowledge? 3“Now gird up your loins like a man,
And I will ask you, and you instruct Me! 4“Where were you when I laid the foundation of the earth?
Tell Me, if you know and have understanding. 5“Who determined the measurements [of the earth], if you know?
Or who stretched the [measuring] line on it? 6“On what were its foundations fastened?
Or who laid its cornerstone, 7When the morning stars sang together
And all the sons of God (angels) shouted for joy? 8“Or who enclosed the sea with doors
When it burst forth and went out of the womb; 9When I made the clouds its garment
And thick darkness its swaddling band, 10And marked for it My [appointed] boundary
And set bars and doors [defining the shorelines], 11And said, ‘This far you shall come, but no farther;
And here your proud waves shall stop’? God’s Mighty Power 12“Since your days began, have you ever commanded the morning,
And caused the dawn to know its place, 13So that light may take hold of the corners of the earth
And shake the wickedness out of it? 14“The earth is changed like clay into which a seal is pressed;
And the things [of the earth] stand out like a [multi-colored] garment. 15“Their light is withheld from the wicked,
And the uplifted arm is broken. 16“Have you entered and explored the springs of the sea
Or [have you] walked in the recesses of the deep? 17“Have the gates of death been revealed to you,
Or have you seen the gates of deep darkness? 18“Have you understood the expanse of the earth?
Tell Me, if you know all this. 19“Where is the way where light dwells?
And as for darkness, where is its place, 20That you may take it to its territory
And that you may know the paths to its house? 21“You [must] know, since you were born then,
And because you are so extremely old! 22“Have you entered the storehouses of the snow,
Or have you seen the storehouses of the hail, 23Which I have reserved for the time of trouble,
For the day of battle and war? 24“Where is the way that the light is distributed,
Or the east wind scattered over the earth? 25“Who has prepared a channel for the torrents of rain and for the flood,
Or a path for the thunderbolt, 26To bring rain on the uninhabited land,
And on the desert where no man lives, 27To satisfy the barren and desolate ground
And to make the seeds of grass to sprout? 28“Has the rain a father?
Or who has begotten the drops of dew? 29“Out of whose womb has come the ice?
And the frost of heaven, who has given it birth? 30“Water becomes like stone [and hides itself],
And the surface of the deep is frozen and imprisoned. 31“Can you bind the chains of [the cluster of stars called] Pleiades,
Or loose the cords of [the constellation] Orion? 32“Can you lead forth a constellation in its season,
And guide [the stars of] the Bear with her sons? 33“Do you know the ordinances of the heavens,
Or [can you] establish their rule over the earth? 34“Can you lift up your voice to the clouds,
So that an abundance of water will cover you? 35“Can you send forth lightnings that they may go
And say to you, ‘Here we are’? 36“Who has put wisdom in the innermost being [of man, or in the layers of clouds]
Or given understanding to the mind [of man, or to the heavenly display]? 37“Who can count the clouds by [earthly] wisdom,
Or pour out the water jars of the heavens, 38When the dust hardens into a mass
And the clods stick together [because of the heat]? 39“Can you [Job] hunt the prey for the lion,
Or satisfy the appetite of the young lions 40When they crouch in their dens
And lie in wait in their lair? 41“Who provides prey for the raven
When its young cry to God
And wander about without food?

Job 39
God Speaks Of Nature And Its Beings
1“Do you know the time when the wild goats of the rock give birth [to their young]?
Do you observe the calving of the deer? 2“Can you count the months that they carry offspring,
Or do you know the time when they give birth? 3“They kneel down, they bring forth their young,
They cast out their labor pains. 4“Their young ones become strong, they grow up in the open field;
They leave and do not return to them. 5“Who sent out the wild donkey free [from dependence on man]?
And who has loosed the bonds of the wild donkey [to survive in the wild], 6To whom I gave the wilderness as his home
And the salt land as his dwelling place? 7“He scorns the tumult of the city,
And does not hear the shouting of the taskmaster. 8“He explores the mountains as his pasture
And searches after every green thing. 9“Will the wild ox be willing to serve you,
Or remain beside your manger at night? 10“Can you bind the wild ox with a harness [to the plow] in the furrow?
Or will he plow the valleys for you? 11“Will you trust him because his strength is great
And leave your labor to him? 12“Will you have faith and depend on him to return your grain
And gather it from your threshing floor? 13“The [flightless] wings of the ostrich wave joyously;
With the pinion (shackles, fetters) and plumage of love, 14For she leaves her eggs on the ground
And warms them in the dust, 15Forgetting that a foot may crush them,
Or that the wild beast may trample them. 16“She treats her young cruelly, as if they were not hers;
Though her labor is in vain because she is unconcerned [for the safety of her brood], 17For God has made her forget wisdom,
And has not given her a share of understanding. 18“Yet when she lifts herself on high,
[So swift is she that] she laughs at the horse and his rider. 19“Have you given the horse his might?
Have you clothed his neck with quivering and a shaking mane? 20“Have you [Job] made him leap like a locust?
The majesty of his snorting [nostrils] is terrible. 21“He paws in the valley and rejoices in his strength;
He goes out to meet the weapons [of armed men]. 22“He laughs at fear and is not dismayed;
And [in battle] he does not turn back from the sword. 23“The quiver rattles against him,
[As do] the flashing spear and the lance [of his rider]. 24“With fierceness and rage he races to devour the ground,
And he does not stand still at the sound of the [war] trumpet. 25“As often as the trumpet sounds he says, ‘Aha!’
And he smells the battle from far away,
And senses the thunder of the captains and the war cry. 26“Is it by your understanding that the hawk soars,
Stretching his wings toward the south [as winter approaches]? 27“Is it at your command that the eagle mounts up
And makes his nest on high [in an inaccessible place]? 28“On the cliff he dwells and remains [securely],
Upon the point of the rock and the inaccessible stronghold. 29“From there he spies out the prey;
His eyes see it from far away. 30“His young ones suck up blood;
And where the slain are, there is he.”

Job 40
Job: What Can I Say?
1Then the LORD said to Job, 2“Will the faultfinder contend with the Almighty?
Let him who disputes with God answer it.”
3Then Job replied to the LORD and said, 4“Behold, I am of little importance and contemptible; what can I reply to You?
I lay my hand on my mouth. 5“I have spoken once, but I will not reply again—
Indeed, twice [I have answered], and I will add nothing further.”
God Questions Job 6Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind, saying, 7“Now gird up your loins (prepare yourself) like a man,
And I will ask you, and you instruct Me. 8“Will you really annul My judgment and set it aside as void?
Will you condemn Me [your God] that you may [appear to] be righteous and justified? 9“Have you an arm like God,
And can you thunder with a voice like His? 10“Adorn yourself with eminence and dignity [since you question the Almighty],
And array yourself with honor and majesty. 11“Pour out the overflowings of your wrath,
And look at everyone who is proud and make him low. 12Look at everyone who is proud, and humble him,
And [if you are so able] tread down the wicked where they stand. 13“[Crush and] hide them in the dust together;
Shut them up in the hidden place [the house of death]. 14“[If you can do all this, Job, proving your divine power] then I [God] will also praise you and acknowledge
That your own right hand can save you. God’s Power Shown in Creatures 15“Behold now, Behemoth, which I created as well as you;
He eats grass like an ox. 16“See now, his strength is in his loins
And his power is in the muscles and sinews of his belly. 17“He sways his tail like a cedar;
The tendons of his thighs are twisted and knit together [like a rope]. 18“His bones are tubes of bronze;
His limbs are like bars of iron. 19“He is the first [in magnitude and power] of the works of God;
[Only] He who made him can bring near His sword [to master him]. 20“Surely the mountains bring him food,
And all the wild animals play there. 21“He lies down under the lotus plants,
In the hidden shelter of the reeds in the marsh. 22“The lotus plants cover him with their shade;
The willows of the brook surround him. 23“If a river rages and overflows, he does not tremble;
He is confident, though the Jordan [River] swells and rushes against his mouth. 24“Can anyone capture him when he is on watch,
Or pierce his nose with barbs [to trap him]?

Job 41
God’s Power Shown In Creatures
1“Can you draw out Leviathan with a fishhook?
Or press down his tongue with a cord? 2“Can you put a rope [made] of rushes into his nose
Or pierce his jaw through with a hook? 3“Will he make many supplications to you [begging to be spared]?
Or will he speak soft words to you [to coax you to treat him kindly]? 4“Will he make a covenant or an arrangement with you?
Will you take him for your servant forever? 5“Will you play with him as with a bird?
Or will you bind him [and put him on a leash] for your maidens? 6“Will traders bargain over him?
Will they divide him up among the merchants? 7“Can you fill his skin with harpoons,
Or his head with fishing spears? 8“Lay your hand on him;
Remember the battle [with him]; you will not do such [an ill-advised thing] again! 9“Behold, his [assailant’s] hope and expectation [of defeating Leviathan] is false;
Will not one be overwhelmed even at the sight of him? 10“No one is so fierce [and foolhardy] that he dares to stir up Leviathan;
Who then is he who can stand before Me [or dares to contend with Me, the beast’s creator]? 11“Who has first given to Me that I should repay him?
Whatever is under the whole heaven is Mine. [Who can have a claim against Me who made the unmastered beast?] 12“I will not keep silence concerning his limbs,
Nor his mighty strength, nor his orderly frame. 13“Who can penetrate or strip off his outer armor?
Who can come to his jaws with a double bridle? 14“Who can open the doors (jaws) of his face?
Around his [open jaws and] teeth there is terror. 15“His strong scales are his pride,
Bound together as with a tight seal. 16“One is so near to another
That no air can come between them. 17“They are joined one to another;
They stick together and cannot be separated. 18“His sneezes flash forth light,
And his eyes are like the [reddish] eyelids of the dawn. 19“Out of his mouth go burning torches,
And sparks of fire leap out. 20“Out of his nostrils smoke goes forth
As from a boiling pot and [as from] burning rushes. 21“His breath kindles coals,
And a flame goes forth from his mouth. 22“In Leviathan’s neck resides strength,
And dismay and terror dance before him. 23“The folds of his flesh are joined together,
Firm on him and immobile [when he moves]. 24“His heart is as hard as a stone,
Indeed, as solid as a lower millstone. 25“When he raises himself up, the mighty are afraid;
Because of the crashing they are bewildered. 26“The sword that reaches him cannot avail,
Nor [does] the spear, the dart, or the javelin. 27“He considers iron as straw,
Bronze as rotten wood. 28“The arrow cannot make him flee;
Slingstones are treated as stubble by him. 29“Clubs [also] are regarded as stubble;
He laughs at the rushing and the rattling of the javelin. 30“His underparts are like sharp pieces of broken pottery;
He moves across and spreads out [grooves] like a threshing sledge on the mire (muddy river banks). 31“He makes the deep water boil like a pot;
He makes the sea like a [foaming] pot of ointment. 32“Behind him he makes a shining wake;
One would think the deep to be gray-haired [with foam]. 33“Upon earth there is nothing like him—no equal exists,
A creature made without fear. 34“He looks on everything that is high [without terror];
He is monarch over all the sons of pride. [And now, Job, who are you who does not dare to disturb the beast, yet who dares resist Me, the beast’s creator? Everything under the heavens is Mine; therefore, who can have a claim against God?]”

Job 42
Job’s Confession
1Then Job answered the LORD and said, 2“I know that You can do all things,
And that no thought or purpose of Yours can be restrained. 3“[You said to me] ‘Who is this that darkens and obscures counsel [by words] without knowledge?’
Therefore [I now see] I have [rashly] uttered that which I did not understand,
Things too wonderful for me, which I did not know. 4‘Hear, please, and I will speak;
I will ask You, and You instruct [and answer] me.’ 5“I had heard of You [only] by the hearing of the ear,
But now my [spiritual] eye sees You. 6“Therefore I retract [my words and hate myself]
And I repent in dust and ashes.”
God Displeased with Job’s Friends 7It came about that after the LORD had spoken these words to Job, that the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite, “My wrath is kindled against you and against your two friends, for you have not spoken of Me what is right, as My servant Job has. 8“Now therefore, take for yourselves seven bulls and seven rams, and go to My servant Job, and offer up a burnt offering for yourselves, and My servant Job will pray for you. For I will accept him [and his prayer] so that I may not deal with you according to your folly, because you have not spoken of Me the thing that is right, as My servant Job has.” 9So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went and did as the LORD told them; and the LORD accepted Job’s prayer.
God Restores Job’s Fortunes 10The LORD restored the fortunes of Job when he prayed for his friends, and the LORD gave Job twice as much as he had before. 11Then all his brothers and sisters and all who had known him before came to him, and they ate bread with him in his house; and they consoled him and comforted him over all the [distressing] adversities that the LORD had brought on him. And each one gave him a piece of money, and each a ring of gold. 12And the LORD blessed the latter days of Job more than his beginning; for he had 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, 1,000 yoke of oxen, and 1,000 female donkeys. 13He had seven sons and three daughters. 14And he called the name of the first [daughter] Jemimah, and the name of the second Keziah, and the name of the third Keren-happuch. 15In all the land there were found no women so fair as the daughters of Job; and their father gave them an inheritance among their brothers. 16After this, Job lived 140 years, and saw his sons and his grandsons, four generations. 17So Job died, an old man and full of days.

Psalm 1
The Righteous And The Wicked Contrasted.
1Blessed [fortunate, prosperous, and favored by God] is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked [following their advice and example],
Nor stand in the path of sinners,
Nor sit [down to rest] in the seat of scoffers (ridiculers). 2But his delight is in the law of the LORD,
And on His law [His precepts and teachings] he [habitually] meditates day and night. 3And he will be like a tree firmly planted [and fed] by streams of water,
Which yields its fruit in its season;
Its leaf does not wither;
And in whatever he does, he prospers [and comes to maturity]. 4The wicked [those who live in disobedience to God’s law] are not so,
But they are like the chaff [worthless and without substance] which the wind blows away. 5Therefore the wicked will not stand [unpunished] in the judgment,
Nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. 6For the LORD knows and fully approves the way of the righteous,
But the way of the wicked shall perish.

Psalm 2
The Reign Of The LORD’S Anointed.
1Why are the nations in an uproar [in turmoil against God],
And why do the people devise a vain and hopeless plot? 2The kings of the earth take their stand;
And the rulers take counsel together
Against the LORD and His Anointed (the Davidic King, the Messiah, the Christ), saying, 3“Let us break apart their [divine] bands [of restraint]
And cast away their cords [of control] from us.” 4He who sits [enthroned] in the heavens laughs [at their rebellion];
The [Sovereign] Lord scoffs at them [and in supreme contempt He mocks them]. 5Then He will speak to them in His [profound] anger
And terrify them with His displeasure, saying, 6“Yet as for Me, I have anointed and firmly installed My King
Upon Zion, My holy mountain.” 7“I will declare the decree of the LORD:
He said to Me, ‘You are My Son;
This day [I proclaim] I have begotten You. 8‘Ask of Me, and I will assuredly give [You] the nations as Your inheritance,
And the ends of the earth as Your possession. 9‘You shall break them with a rod of iron;
You shall shatter them [in pieces] like earthenware.’” 10Now therefore, O kings, act wisely;
Be instructed and take warning, O leaders (judges, rulers) of the earth. 11Worship the LORD and serve Him with reverence [with awe-inspired fear and submissive wonder];
Rejoice [yet do so] with trembling. 12Kiss (pay respect to) the Son, so that He does not become angry, and you perish in the way,
For His wrath may soon be kindled and set aflame.
How blessed [fortunate, prosperous, and favored by God] are all those who take refuge in Him!

Psalm 3
Morning Prayer Of Trust In God.
A Psalm of David. When he fled from Absalom his son. 1O LORD, how my enemies have increased!
Many are rising up against me. 2Many are saying of me,
“There is no help [no salvation] for him in God.” Selah. 3But You, O LORD, are a shield for me,
My glory [and my honor], and the One who lifts my head. 4With my voice I was crying to the LORD,
And He answered me from His holy mountain. Selah. 5I lay down and slept [safely];
I awakened, for the LORD sustains me. 6I will not be intimidated or afraid of the ten thousands
Who have set themselves against me all around. 7Arise, O LORD; save me, O my God!
For You have struck all my enemies on the cheek;
You have shattered the teeth of the wicked. 8Salvation belongs to the LORD;
May Your blessing be upon Your people. Selah.

Psalm 4
Evening Prayer Of Trust In God.
To the Chief Musician; on stringed instruments. A Psalm of David. 1Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness!
You have freed me when I was hemmed in and relieved me when I was in distress;
Be gracious to me and hear [and respond to] my prayer. 2O sons of men, how long will my honor and glory be [turned into] shame?
How long will you [my enemies] love worthless (vain, futile) things and seek deception and lies? Selah. 3But know that the LORD has set apart for Himself [and dealt wonderfully with] the godly man [the one of honorable character and moral courage—the one who does right].
The LORD hears and responds when I call to Him. 4Tremble [with anger or fear], and do not sin;
Meditate in your heart upon your bed and be still [reflect on your sin and repent of your rebellion]. Selah. 5Offer righteous sacrifices;
Trust [confidently] in the LORD. 6Many are saying, “Oh, that we might see some good!”
Lift up the light of Your face upon us, O LORD. 7You have put joy in my heart,
More than [others know] when their wheat and new wine have yielded abundantly. 8In peace [and with a tranquil heart] I will both lie down and sleep,
For You alone, O LORD, make me dwell in safety and confident trust.

Psalm 5
Prayer For Protection From The Wicked.
To the Chief Musician; on wind instruments. A Psalm of David. 1Listen to my words, O LORD,
Consider my groaning and sighing. 2Heed the sound of my cry for help, my King and my God,
For to You I pray. 3In the morning, O LORD, You will hear my voice;
In the morning I will prepare [a prayer and a sacrifice] for You and watch and wait [for You to speak to my heart]. 4For You are not a God who takes pleasure in wickedness;
No evil [person] dwells with You. 5The boastful and the arrogant will not stand in Your sight;
You hate all who do evil. 6You destroy those who tell lies;
The LORD detests and rejects the bloodthirsty and deceitful man. 7But as for me, I will enter Your house through the abundance of Your steadfast love and tender mercy;
At Your holy temple I will bow [obediently] in reverence for You. 😯 LORD, lead me in Your righteousness because of my enemies;
Make Your way straight (direct, right) before me. 9For there is nothing trustworthy or reliable or truthful in what they say;
Their heart is destruction [just a treacherous chasm, a yawning gulf of lies].
Their throat is an open grave;
They [glibly] flatter with their [silken] tongue. 10Hold them guilty, O God;
Let them fall by their own designs and councils!
Cast them out because of the abundance of their transgressions,
For they are mutinous and have rebelled against You. 11But let all who take refuge and put their trust in You rejoice,
Let them ever sing for joy;
Because You cover and shelter them,
Let those who love Your name be joyful and exult in You. 12For You, O LORD, bless the righteous man [the one who is in right standing with You];
You surround him with favor as with a shield.

Psalm 6
Prayer For Mercy In Time Of Trouble.
To the Chief Musician; on stringed instruments, set [possibly] an octave below. A Psalm of David. 1O LORD, do not rebuke or punish me in Your anger,
Nor discipline me in Your wrath. 2Have mercy on me and be gracious to me, O LORD, for I am weak (faint, frail);
Heal me, O LORD, for my bones are dismayed and anguished. 3My soul [as well as my body] is greatly dismayed.
But as for You, O LORD—how long [until You act on my behalf]? 4Return, O LORD, rescue my soul;
Save me because of Your [unfailing] steadfast love and mercy. 5For in death there is no mention of You;
In Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) who will praise You and give You thanks? 6I am weary with my groaning;
Every night I soak my bed with tears,
I drench my couch with my weeping. 7My eye grows dim with grief;
It grows old because of all my enemies. 8Depart from me, all you who do evil,
For the LORD has heard the voice of my weeping. 9The LORD has heard my supplication [my plea for grace];
The LORD receives my prayer. 10Let all my enemies be ashamed and greatly horrified;
Let them turn back, let them suddenly be ashamed [of what they have done].

Psalm 7
The LORD Implored To Defend The Psalmist Against The Wicked.
An Ode of David, [perhaps in a wild, irregular, enthusiastic strain,] which he sang to the LORD concerning the words of Cush, a Benjamite. 1O LORD my God, in You I take refuge;
Save me and rescue me from all those who pursue me, 2So that my enemy will not tear me like a lion,
Dragging me away while there is no one to rescue [me]. 3O LORD my God, if I have done this,
If there is injustice in my hands, 4If I have done evil to him who was at peace with me,
Or without cause robbed him who was my enemy, 5Let the enemy pursue me and overtake me;
And let him trample my life to the ground
And lay my honor in the dust. Selah. 6Arise, O LORD, in Your anger;
Lift up Yourself against the rage of my enemies;
Rise up for me; You have commanded judgment and vindication. 7Let the assembly of the nations be gathered around You,
And return on high over them. 8The LORD judges the peoples;
Judge me, O LORD, and grant me justice according to my righteousness and according to the integrity within me. 9Oh, let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the righteous [those in right standing with You];
For the righteous God tries the hearts and minds. 10My shield and my defense depend on God,
Who saves the upright in heart. 11God is a righteous judge,
And a God who is indignant every day. 12If a man does not repent, God will sharpen His sword;
He has strung and bent His [mighty] bow and made it ready. 13He has also prepared [other] deadly weapons for Himself;
He makes His arrows fiery shafts [aimed at the unrepentant]. 14Behold, the [wicked and irreverent] man is pregnant with sin,
And he conceives mischief and gives birth to lies. 15He has dug a pit and hollowed it out,
And has fallen into the [very] pit which he made [as a trap]. 16His mischief will return on his own head,
And his violence will come down on the top of his head [like loose dirt]. 17I will give thanks to the LORD according to His righteousness and justice,
And I will sing praise to the name of the LORD Most High.

Psalm 8
The LORD’S Glory And Man’s Dignity.
To the Chief Musician; set to a Philistine lute [or perhaps to a particular Hittite tune]. A Psalm of David. 1O LORD, our Lord,
How majestic and glorious and excellent is Your name in all the earth!
You have displayed Your splendor above the heavens. 2Out of the mouths of infants and nursing babes You have established strength
Because of Your adversaries,
That You might silence the enemy and make the revengeful cease. 3When I see and consider Your heavens, the work of Your fingers,
The moon and the stars, which You have established, 4What is man that You are mindful of him,
And the son of [earthborn] man that You care for him? 5Yet You have made him a little lower than God,
And You have crowned him with glory and honor. 6You made him to have dominion over the works of Your hands;
You have put all things under his feet, 7All sheep and oxen,
And also the beasts of the field, 8The birds of the air, and the fish of the sea,
Whatever passes through the paths of the seas. 9O LORD, our Lord,
How majestic and glorious and excellent is Your name in all the earth!

Psalm 9
A Psalm Of Thanksgiving For God’s Justice.
To the Chief Musician; on Muth-labben. A Psalm of David. 1I will give thanks and praise the LORD, with all my heart;
I will tell aloud all Your wonders and marvelous deeds. 2I will rejoice and exult in you;
I will sing praise to Your name, O Most High. 3When my enemies turn back,
They stumble and perish before You. 4For You have maintained my right and my cause;
You have sat on the throne judging righteously. 5You have rebuked the nations, You have destroyed the wicked and unrepentant;
You have wiped out their name forever and ever. 6The enemy has been cut off and has vanished in everlasting ruins,
You have uprooted their cities;
The very memory of them has perished. 7But the LORD will remain and sit enthroned forever;
He has prepared and established His throne for judgment. 8And He will judge the world in righteousness;
He will execute judgment for the nations with fairness (equity). 9The LORD also will be a refuge and a stronghold for the oppressed,
A refuge in times of trouble; 10And those who know Your name [who have experienced Your precious mercy] will put their confident trust in You,
For You, O LORD, have not abandoned those who seek You. 11Sing praises to the LORD, who dwells in Zion;
Declare among the peoples His [great and wondrous] deeds. 12For He who avenges blood [unjustly shed] remembers them (His people);
He does not forget the cry of the afflicted and abused. 13Have mercy on me and be gracious to me, O LORD;
See how I am afflicted by those who hate me,
You who lift me up from the gates of death, 14That I may tell aloud all Your praises,
That in the gates of the daughter of Zion (Jerusalem)
I may rejoice in Your salvation and Your help. 15The nations have sunk down in the pit which they have made;
In the net which they hid, their own foot has been caught. 16The LORD has made Himself known;
He executes judgment;
The wicked are trapped by the work of their own hands. Higgaion (meditation) Selah. 17The wicked will turn to Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead),
Even all the nations who forget God. 18For the poor will not always be forgotten,
Nor the hope of the burdened perish forever. 19Arise, O LORD, do not let man prevail;
Let the nations be judged before You. 20Put them in [reverent] fear of You, O LORD,
So that the nations may know they are but [frail and mortal] men. Selah.

Psalm 10
A Prayer For The Overthrow Of The Wicked.
1Why do You stand far away, O LORD?
Why do You hide [Yourself, veiling Your eyes] in times of trouble? 2In pride and arrogance the wicked hotly pursue and persecute the afflicted;
Let them be caught in the plots which they have devised. 3For the wicked boasts and sings the praises of his heart’s desire,
And the greedy man curses and spurns [and even despises] the LORD. 4The wicked, in the haughtiness of his face, will not seek nor inquire for Him;
All his thoughts are, “There is no God [so there is no accountability or punishment].” 5His ways prosper at all times;
Your judgments [LORD] are on high, out of his sight [so he never thinks about them];
As for all his enemies, he sneers at them. 6He says to himself, “I will not be moved;
For throughout all generations I will not be in adversity [for nothing bad will happen to me].” 7His mouth is full of curses and deceit (fraud) and oppression;
Under his tongue is mischief and wickedness [injustice and sin]. 8He lurks in ambush in the villages;
In hiding places he kills the innocent;
He lies in wait for the unfortunate [the unhappy, the poor, the helpless]. 9He lurks in a hiding place like a lion in his lair;
He lies in wait to catch the afflicted;
He catches the afflicted when he draws him into his net. 10He crushes [his prey] and crouches;
And the unfortunate fall by his mighty claws. 11He says to himself, “God has [quite] forgotten;
He has hidden His face; He will never see my deed.” 12Arise, O LORD! O God, lift up Your hand [in judgment];
Do not forget the suffering. 13Why has the wicked spurned and shown disrespect to God?
He has said to himself, “You will not require me to account.” 14You have seen it, for You have noted mischief and vexation (irritation) to take it into Your hand.
The unfortunate commits himself to You;
You are the helper of the fatherless. 15Break the arm of the wicked and the evildoer,
Seek out his wickedness until You find no more. 16The LORD is King forever and ever;
The nations will perish from His land. 17O LORD, You have heard the desire of the humble and oppressed;
You will strengthen their heart, You will incline Your ear to hear, 18To vindicate and obtain justice for the fatherless and the oppressed,
So that man who is of the earth will no longer terrify them.

Psalm 11
The LORD A Refuge And Defense.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1In the LORD I take refuge [and put my trust];
How can you say to me, “Flee like a bird to your mountain; 2For look, the wicked are bending the bow;
They take aim with their arrow on the string
To shoot [by stealth] in darkness at the upright in heart. 3“If the foundations [of a godly society] are destroyed,
What can the righteous do?” 4The LORD is in His holy temple; the LORD’S throne is in heaven.
His eyes see, His eyelids test the children of men. 5The LORD tests the righteous and the wicked,
And His soul hates the [malevolent] one who loves violence. 6Upon the wicked (godless) He will rain coals of fire;
Fire and brimstone and a dreadful scorching wind will be the portion of their cup [of doom]. 7For the LORD is [absolutely] righteous, He loves righteousness (virtue, morality, justice);
The upright shall see His face.

Psalm 12
God, A Helper Against The Treacherous.
To the Chief Musician; set an octave below. A Psalm of David. 1Save and help and rescue, LORD, for godly people cease to be,
For the faithful vanish from among the sons of men. 2They speak deceitful and worthless words to one another;
With flattering lips and a double heart they speak. 3May the LORD cut off all flattering lips,
The tongue that speaks great things [in boasting]; 4Who have said, “With our tongue we will prevail;
Our lips are our own; who is lord and master over us?” 5“Because of the devastation of the afflicted, because of the groaning of the needy,
Now I will arise,” says the LORD; “I will place him in the safety for which he longs.” 6The words and promises of the LORD are pure words,
Like silver refined in an earthen furnace, purified seven times. 7You, O LORD, will preserve and keep them;
You will protect him from this [evil] generation forever. 8The wicked strut about [in pompous self-importance] on every side,
As vileness is exalted and baseness is prized among the sons of men.

Psalm 13
Prayer For Help In Trouble.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1How long, O LORD? Will You forget me forever?
How long will You hide Your face from me? 2How long must I take counsel in my soul,
Having sorrow in my heart day after day?
How long will my enemy exalt himself and triumph over me? 3Consider and answer me, O LORD my God;
Give light (life) to my eyes, or I will sleep the sleep of death, 4And my enemy will say, “I have overcome him,”
And my adversaries will rejoice when I am shaken. 5But I have trusted and relied on and been confident in Your lovingkindness and faithfulness;
My heart shall rejoice and delight in Your salvation. 6I will sing to the LORD,
Because He has dealt bountifully with me.

Psalm 14
Folly And Wickedness Of Men.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1The [spiritually ignorant] fool has said in his heart, “There is no God.”
They are corrupt, they have committed repulsive and unspeakable deeds;
There is no one who does good. 2The LORD has looked down from heaven upon the children of men
To see if there are any who understand (act wisely),
Who [truly] seek after God, [longing for His wisdom and guidance]. 3They have all turned aside, together they have become corrupt;
There is no one who does good, not even one. 4Have all the workers of wickedness and injustice no knowledge,
Who eat up my people as they eat bread,
And do not call upon the LORD? 5There they tremble with great fear,
For God is with the [consistently] righteous generation. 6You [evildoers] shamefully plan against the poor,
But the LORD is his safe refuge. 7Oh, that the salvation of Israel would come out of Zion!
When the LORD restores His captive people,
Then Jacob will rejoice, Israel will be glad.

Psalm 15
Description Of A Citizen Of Zion.
A Psalm of David. 1O LORD, who may lodge [as a guest] in Your tent?
Who may dwell [continually] on Your holy hill? 2He who walks with integrity and strength of character, and works righteousness,
And speaks and holds truth in his heart. 3He does not slander with his tongue,
Nor does evil to his neighbor,
Nor takes up a reproach against his friend; 4In his eyes an evil person is despised,
But he honors those who fear the LORD [and obediently worship Him with awe-inspired reverence and submissive wonder].
He keeps his word even to his own disadvantage and does not change it [for his own benefit]; 5He does not put out his money at interest [to a fellow Israelite],
And does not take a bribe against the innocent.
He who does these things will never be shaken.

Psalm 16
The LORD The Psalmist’s Portion In Life And Deliverer In Death.
A Mikhtam of David [probably intended to record memorable thoughts]. 1Keep and protect me, O God, for in You I have placed my trust and found refuge. 2I said to the LORD, “You are my Lord;
I have no good besides You.” 3As for the saints (godly people) who are in the land,
They are the majestic and the noble and the excellent ones in whom is all my delight. 4The sorrows [pain and suffering] of those who have chosen another god will be multiplied [because of their idolatry];
I will not pour out their drink offerings of blood,
Nor will I take their names upon my lips. 5The LORD is the portion of my inheritance, my cup [He is all I need];
You support my lot. 6The [boundary] lines [of the land] have fallen for me in pleasant places;
Indeed, my heritage is beautiful to me. 7I will bless the LORD who has counseled me;
Indeed, my heart (mind) instructs me in the night. 8I have set the LORD continually before me;
Because He is at my right hand, I will not be shaken. 9Therefore my heart is glad and my glory [my innermost self] rejoices;
My body too will dwell [confidently] in safety, 10For You will not abandon me to Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead),
Nor will You allow Your Holy One to undergo decay. 11You will show me the path of life;
In Your presence is fullness of joy;
In Your right hand there are pleasures forevermore.

Psalm 17
Prayer For Protection Against Oppressors.
A Prayer of David. 1Hear the just (righteous) cause, O LORD; listen to my loud [piercing] cry;
Listen to my prayer, that comes from guileless lips. 2Let my verdict of vindication come from Your presence;
May Your eyes look with equity and behold things that are just. 3You have tried my heart;
You have visited me in the night;
You have tested me and You find nothing [evil in me];
I intend that my mouth will not transgress. 4Concerning the deeds of men, by the word of Your lips
I have kept away from the paths of the violent. 5My steps have held closely to Your paths;
My feet have not staggered. 6I have called upon You, for You, O God, will answer me;
Incline Your ear to me, hear my speech. 7Wondrously show Your [marvelous and amazing] lovingkindness,
O Savior of those who take refuge at Your right hand
From those who rise up against them. 8Keep me [in Your affectionate care, protect me] as the apple of Your eye;
Hide me in the [protective] shadow of Your wings 9From the wicked who despoil and deal violently with me,
My deadly enemies who surround me. 10They have closed their unfeeling heart [to kindness and compassion];
With their mouths they speak proudly and make presumptuous claims. 11They track us down and have now surrounded us in our steps;
They set their eyes to force us to the ground, 12He is like a lion eager to tear [his prey],
And like a young lion lurking in hiding places. 13Arise, O LORD, confront him, cast him down;
Save my soul from the wicked with Your sword, 14From men with Your hand, O LORD,
From men of the world [these moths of the night] whose portion [of enjoyment] is in this life—idle and vain,
And whose belly You fill with Your treasure;
They are satisfied with children,
And they leave what they have left [of wealth] to their children. 15As for me, I shall see Your face in righteousness;
I will be [fully] satisfied when I awake [to find myself] seeing Your likeness.

Psalm 18
David Praises The LORD For Rescuing Him.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David, the servant of the LORD, who spoke the words of this song to the LORD on the day when the LORD rescued him from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. And he said: 1“I love You [fervently and devotedly], O LORD, my strength.” 2The LORD is my rock, my fortress, and the One who rescues me;
My God, my rock and strength in whom I trust and take refuge;
My shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower—my stronghold. 3I call upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised;
And I am saved from my enemies. 4The cords of death surrounded me,
And the streams of ungodliness and torrents of destruction terrified me. 5The cords of Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) surrounded me;
The snares of death confronted me. 6In my distress [when I seemed surrounded] I called upon the LORD
And cried to my God for help;
He heard my voice from His temple,
And my cry for help came before Him, into His very ears. 7Then the earth shook and quaked,
The foundations of the mountains trembled;
They were shaken because He was indignant and angry. 8Smoke went up from His nostrils,
And fire from His mouth devoured;
Coals were kindled by it. 9He bowed the heavens also and came down;
And thick darkness was under His feet. 10And He rode upon a cherub (storm) and flew;
And He sped on the wings of the wind. 11He made darkness His hiding place (covering); His pavilion (canopy) around Him,
The darkness of the waters, the thick clouds of the skies. 12Out of the brightness before Him passed His thick clouds,
Hailstones and coals of fire. 13The LORD also thundered in the heavens,
And the Most High uttered His voice,
Hailstones and coals of fire. 14He sent out His arrows and scattered them;
And He sent an abundance of lightning flashes and confused and routed them [in defeat]. 15Then the stream beds of the waters appeared,
And the foundations of the world were laid bare
At Your rebuke, O LORD,
At the blast of the breath of Your nostrils. 16He reached from on high, He took me;
He drew me out of many waters. 17He rescued me from my strong enemy,
And from those who hated me, for they were too strong for me. 18They confronted me in the day of my disaster,
But the LORD was my support. 19He brought me out into a broad place;
He rescued me because He was pleased with me and delighted in me. 20The LORD dealt with me according to my righteousness (moral character, spiritual integrity);
According to the cleanness of my hands He has rewarded me. 21For I have kept the ways of the LORD,
And have not wickedly departed from my God. 22For all His ordinances were before me,
And I did not put away His statutes from me. 23I was blameless before Him,
And I kept myself free from my sin. 24Therefore the LORD has rewarded me according to my righteousness (moral character, spiritual integrity),
According to the cleanness of my hands in His sight. 25With the kind (merciful, faithful, loyal) You show Yourself kind,
With the blameless You show Yourself blameless, 26With the pure You show Yourself pure,
And with the crooked You show Yourself astute. 27For You save an afflicted and humble people,
But bring down those [arrogant fools] with haughty eyes. 28For You cause my lamp to be lighted and to shine;
The LORD my God illumines my darkness. 29For by You I can crush a troop,
And by my God I can leap over a wall. 30As for God, His way is blameless.
The word of the LORD is tested [it is perfect, it is faultless];
He is a shield to all who take refuge in Him. 31For who is God, but the LORD?
Or who is a rock, except our God, 32The God who encircles me with strength
And makes my way blameless? 33He makes my feet like hinds’ feet [able to stand firmly and tread safely on paths of testing and trouble];
He sets me [securely] upon my high places. 34He trains my hands for war,
So that my arms can bend a bow of bronze. 35You have also given me the shield of Your salvation,
And Your right hand upholds and sustains me;
Your gentleness [Your gracious response when I pray] makes me great. 36You enlarge the path beneath me and make my steps secure,
So that my feet will not slip. 37I pursued my enemies and overtook them;
And I did not turn back until they were consumed. 38I shattered them so that they were not able to rise;
They fell [wounded] under my feet. 39For You have encircled me with strength for the battle;
You have subdued under me those who rose up against me. 40You have also made my enemies turn their backs to me [in defeat],
And I silenced and destroyed those who hated me. 41They cried for help, but there was no one to save them—
Even to the LORD [they cried], but He did not answer them. 42Then I beat them fine as the dust before the wind;
I emptied them out as the dirt of the streets. 43You have rescued me from the contentions of the people;
You have placed me as the head of the nations;
A people whom I have not known serve me. 44As soon as they hear me, they respond and obey me;
Foreigners feign obedience to me. 45Foreigners lose heart,
And come trembling out of their strongholds. 46The LORD lives, blessed be my rock;
And may the God of my salvation be exalted, 47The God who avenges me,
And subdues peoples (nations) under me. 48He rescues me from my enemies;
Yes, You lift me up above those who rise up against me;
You deliver me from the man of violence. 49Therefore will I give thanks and praise You, O LORD, among the nations,
And sing praises to Your name. 50He gives great triumphs to His king,
And shows steadfast love and mercy to His anointed,
To David and his descendants forever.

Psalm 19
The Works And The Word Of God.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1The heavens are telling of the glory of God;
And the expanse [of heaven] is declaring the work of His hands. 2Day after day pours forth speech,
And night after night reveals knowledge. 3There is no speech, nor are there [spoken] words [from the stars];
Their voice is not heard. 4Yet their voice [in quiet evidence] has gone out through all the earth,
Their words to the end of the world.
In them and in the heavens He has made a tent for the sun, 5Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber;
It rejoices as a strong man to run his course. 6The sun’s rising is from one end of the heavens,
And its circuit to the other end of them;
And there is nothing hidden from its heat. 7The law of the LORD is perfect (flawless), restoring and refreshing the soul;
The statutes of the LORD are reliable and trustworthy, making wise the simple. 8The precepts of the LORD are right, bringing joy to the heart;
The commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes. 9The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring forever;
The judgments of the LORD are true, they are righteous altogether. 10They are more desirable than gold, yes, than much fine gold;
Sweeter also than honey and the drippings of the honeycomb. 11Moreover, by them Your servant is warned [reminded, illuminated, and instructed];
In keeping them there is great reward. 12Who can understand his errors or omissions? Acquit me of hidden (unconscious, unintended) faults. 13Also keep back Your servant from presumptuous (deliberate, willful) sins;
Let them not rule and have control over me.
Then I will be blameless (complete),
And I shall be acquitted of great transgression. 14Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart
Be acceptable and pleasing in Your sight,
O LORD, my [firm, immovable] rock and my Redeemer.

Psalm 20
Prayer For Victory Over Enemies.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1May the LORD answer you (David) in the day of trouble!
May the name of the God of Jacob set you securely on high [and defend you in battle]! 2May He send you help from the sanctuary (His dwelling place)
And support and strengthen you from Zion! 3May He remember all your meal offerings
And accept your burnt offering. Selah. 4May He grant you your heart’s desire
And fulfill all your plans. 5We will sing joyously over your victory,
And in the name of our God we will set up our banners.
May the LORD fulfill all your petitions. 6Now I know that the LORD saves His anointed;
He will answer him from His holy heaven
With the saving strength of His right hand. 7Some trust in chariots and some in horses,
But we will remember and trust in the name of the LORD our God. 8They have bowed down and fallen,
But we have risen and stood upright. 9O LORD, save [the king];
May the King answer us in the day we call.

Psalm 21
Praise For Help.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1O LORD the king will delight in Your strength,
And in Your salvation how greatly will he rejoice! 2You have given him his heart’s desire,
And You have not withheld the request of his lips. Selah. 3For You meet him with blessings of good things;
You set a crown of pure gold on his head. 4He asked life of You,
And You gave it to him,
Long life forever and evermore. 5His glory is great because of Your victory;
Splendor and majesty You bestow upon him. 6For You make him most blessed [and a blessing] forever;
You make him joyful with the joy of Your presence. 7For the king [confidently] trusts in the LORD,
And through the lovingkindness (faithfulness, goodness) of the Most High he will never be shaken. 8Your hand will reach out and defeat all your enemies;
Your right hand will reach those who hate you. 9You will make them as [if in] a blazing oven in the time of your anger;
The LORD will swallow them up in His wrath,
And the fire will devour them. 10Their offspring You will destroy from the earth,
And their descendants from the sons of men. 11For they planned evil against You;
They devised a [malevolent] plot
And they will not succeed. 12For You will make them turn their backs [in defeat];
You will aim Your bowstring [of divine justice] at their faces. 13Be exalted, LORD, in Your strength;
We will sing and praise Your power.

Psalm 22
A Cry Of Anguish And A Song Of Praise.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] Aijeleth Hashshahar (The Doe of the Dawn). A Psalm of David. 1My God, my God, why have You forsaken me?
Why are You so far from helping me, and from the words of my groaning? 2O my God, I call out by day, but You do not answer;
And by night, but I find no rest nor quiet. 3But You are holy,
O You who are enthroned in [the holy place where] the praises of Israel [are offered]. 4In You our fathers trusted [leaned on, relied on, and were confident];
They trusted and You rescued them. 5They cried out to You and were delivered;
They trusted in You and were not disappointed or ashamed. 6But I am [treated as] a worm [insignificant and powerless] and not a man;
I am the scorn of men and despised by the people. 7All who see me laugh at me and mock me;
They [insultingly] open their lips, they shake their head, saying, 8“He trusted and committed himself to the LORD, let Him save him.
Let Him rescue him, because He delights in him.” 9Yet You are He who pulled me out of the womb;
You made me trust when on my mother’s breasts. 10I was cast upon You from birth;
From my mother’s womb You have been my God. 11Do not be far from me, for trouble is near;
And there is no one to help. 12Many [enemies like] bulls have surrounded me;
Strong bulls of Bashan have encircled me. 13They open wide their mouths against me,
Like a ravening and a roaring lion. 14I am poured out like water,
And all my bones are out of joint.
My heart is like wax;
It is melted [by anguish] within me. 15My strength is dried up like a fragment of clay pottery;
And my [dry] tongue clings to my jaws;
And You have laid me in the dust of death. 16For [a pack of] dogs have surrounded me;
A gang of evildoers has encircled me,
They pierced my hands and my feet. 17I can count all my bones;
They look, they stare at me. 18They divide my clothing among them
And cast lots for my garment. 19But You, O LORD, do not be far from me;
O You my help, come quickly to my assistance. 20Rescue my life from the sword,
My only life from the paw of the dog (the executioner). 21Save me from the lion’s mouth;
From the horns of the wild oxen You answer me. 22I will tell of Your name to my countrymen;
In the midst of the congregation I will praise You. 23You who fear the LORD [with awe-inspired reverence], praise Him!
All you descendants of Jacob, honor Him.
Fear Him [with submissive wonder], all you descendants of Israel. 24For He has not despised nor detested the suffering of the afflicted;
Nor has He hidden His face from him;
But when he cried to Him for help, He listened. 25My praise will be of You in the great assembly.
I will pay my vows [made in the time of trouble] before those who [reverently] fear Him. 26The afflicted will eat and be satisfied;
Those who [diligently] seek Him and require Him [as their greatest need] will praise the LORD.
May your hearts live forever! 27All the ends of the earth will remember and turn to the LORD,
And all the families of the nations will bow down and worship before You, 28For the kingship and the kingdom are the LORD’S
And He rules over the nations. 29All the prosperous of the earth will eat and worship;
All those who go down to the dust (the dead) will bow before Him,
Even he who cannot keep his soul alive. 30Posterity will serve Him;
They will tell of the Lord to the next generation. 31They will come and declare His righteousness
To a people yet to be born—that He has done it [and that it is finished].

Psalm 23
The LORD, The Psalmist’s Shepherd.
A Psalm of David. 1The LORD is my Shepherd [to feed, to guide and to shield me],
I shall not want. 2He lets me lie down in green pastures;
He leads me beside the still and quiet waters. 3He refreshes and restores my soul (life);
He leads me in the paths of righteousness
for His name’s sake. 4Even though I walk through the [sunless] valley of the shadow of death,
I fear no evil, for You are with me;
Your rod [to protect] and Your staff [to guide], they comfort and console me. 5You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies.
You have anointed and refreshed my head with oil;
My cup overflows. 6Surely goodness and mercy and unfailing love shall follow me all the days of my life,
And I shall dwell forever [throughout all my days] in the house and in the presence of the LORD.

Psalm 24
The King Of Glory Entering Zion.
A Psalm of David. 1The earth is the LORD’S, and the fullness of it,
The world, and those who dwell in it. 2For He has founded it upon the seas
And established it upon the streams and the rivers. 3Who may ascend onto the mountain of the LORD?
And who may stand in His holy place? 4He who has clean hands and a pure heart,
Who has not lifted up his soul to what is false,
Nor has sworn [oaths] deceitfully. 5He shall receive a blessing from the LORD,
And righteousness from the God of his salvation. 6This is the generation (description) of those who diligently seek Him and require Him as their greatest need,
Who seek Your face, even [as did] Jacob. Selah. 7Lift up your heads, O gates,
And be lifted up, ancient doors,
That the King of glory may come in. 8Who is the King of glory?
The LORD strong and mighty,
The LORD mighty in battle. 9Lift up your heads, O gates,
And lift them up, ancient doors,
That the King of glory may come in. 10Who is [He then] this King of glory?
The LORD of hosts,
He is the King of glory [who rules over all creation with His heavenly armies]. Selah.

Psalm 25
Prayer For Protection, Guidance And Pardon.
A Psalm of David. 1To You, O LORD, I lift up my soul. 2O my God, in You I [have unwavering] trust [and I rely on You with steadfast confidence],
Do not let me be ashamed or my hope in You be disappointed;
Do not let my enemies triumph over me. 3Indeed, none of those who [expectantly] wait for You will be ashamed;
Those who turn away from what is right and deal treacherously without cause will be ashamed (humiliated, embarrassed). 4Let me know Your ways, O LORD;
Teach me Your paths. 5Guide me in Your truth and teach me,
For You are the God of my salvation;
For You [and only You] I wait [expectantly] all the day long. 6Remember, O LORD, Your [tender] compassion and Your lovingkindnesses,
For they have been from of old. 7Do not remember the sins of my youth or my transgressions;
According to Your lovingkindness remember me,
For Your goodness’ sake, O LORD. 8Good and upright is the LORD;
Therefore He instructs sinners in the way. 9He leads the humble in justice,
And He teaches the humble His way. 10All the paths of the LORD are lovingkindness and goodness and truth and faithfulness
To those who keep His covenant and His testimonies. 11For Your name’s sake, O LORD,
Pardon my wickedness and my guilt, for they are great. 12Who is the man who fears the LORD [with awe-inspired reverence and worships Him with submissive wonder]?
He will teach him [through His word] in the way he should choose. 13His soul will dwell in prosperity and goodness,
And his descendants will inherit the land. 14The secret [of the wise counsel] of the LORD is for those who fear Him,
And He will let them know His covenant and reveal to them [through His word] its [deep, inner] meaning. 15My eyes are continually toward the LORD,
For He will bring my feet out of the net. 16Turn to me [LORD] and be gracious to me,
For I am alone and afflicted. 17The troubles of my heart are multiplied;
Bring me out of my distresses. 18Look upon my affliction and my trouble,
And forgive all my sins. 19Look upon my enemies, for they are many;
They hate me with cruel and violent hatred. 20Guard my soul and rescue me;
Do not let me be ashamed or disappointed,
For I have taken refuge in You. 21Let integrity and uprightness protect me,
For I wait [expectantly] for You. 22O God, redeem Israel,
Out of all his troubles.

Psalm 26
Protestation Of Integrity And Prayer For Protection.
A Psalm of David. 1Vindicate me, O LORD, for I have walked in my integrity;
I have [relied on and] trusted [confidently] in the LORD without wavering and I shall not slip. 2Examine me, O LORD, and try me;
Test my heart and my mind. 3For Your lovingkindness is before my eyes,
And I have walked [faithfully] in Your truth. 4I do not sit with deceitful or unethical or worthless men,
Nor seek companionship with pretenders (self-righteous hypocrites). 5I hate the company of evildoers,
And will not sit with the wicked. 6I will wash my hands in innocence,
And I will go about Your altar, O LORD, 7That I may proclaim with the voice of thanksgiving
And declare all Your wonders. 😯 LORD, I love the habitation of Your house
And the place where Your glory dwells. 9Do not sweep my soul away with sinners,
Nor [sweep away] my life with men of bloodshed, 10In whose hands is a wicked scheme,
And whose right hand is full of bribes. 11But as for me, I shall walk in my integrity;
Redeem me and be merciful and gracious to me. 12My foot stands on a level place;
In the congregations I will bless the LORD.

Psalm 27
A Psalm Of Fearless Trust In God.
A Psalm of David. 1The LORD is my light and my salvation—
Whom shall I fear?
The LORD is the refuge and fortress of my life—
Whom shall I dread? 2When the wicked came against me to eat up my flesh,
My adversaries and my enemies, they stumbled and fell. 3Though an army encamp against me,
My heart will not fear;
Though war arise against me,
Even in this I am confident. 4One thing I have asked of the LORD, and that I will seek:
That I may dwell in the house of the LORD [in His presence] all the days of my life,
To gaze upon the beauty [the delightful loveliness and majestic grandeur] of the LORD
And to meditate in His temple. 5For in the day of trouble He will hide me in His shelter;
In the secret place of His tent He will hide me;
He will lift me up on a rock. 6And now my head will be lifted up above my enemies around me,
In His tent I will offer sacrifices with shouts of joy;
I will sing, yes, I will sing praises to the LORD. 7Hear, O LORD, when I cry aloud;
Be gracious and compassionate to me and answer me. 8When You said, “Seek My face [in prayer, require My presence as your greatest need],” my heart said to You,
“Your face, O LORD, I will seek [on the authority of Your word].” 9Do not hide Your face from me,
Do not turn Your servant away in anger;
You have been my help;
Do not abandon me nor leave me,
O God of my salvation! 10Although my father and my mother have abandoned me,
Yet the LORD will take me up [adopt me as His child]. 11Teach me Your way, O LORD,
And lead me on a level path
Because of my enemies [who lie in wait]. 12Do not give me up to the will of my adversaries,
For false witnesses have come against me;
They breathe out violence. 13I would have despaired had I not believed that I would see the goodness of the LORD
In the land of the living. 14Wait for and confidently expect the LORD;
Be strong and let your heart take courage;
Yes, wait for and confidently expect the LORD.

Psalm 28
A Prayer For Help, And Praise For Its Answer.
A Psalm of David. 1To you I call, O LORD,
My rock, do not be deaf to me,
For if You are silent to me,
I will become like those who go down to the pit (grave). 2Hear the voice of my supplication (specific requests, humble entreaties) as I cry to You for help,
As I lift up my hands and heart toward Your innermost sanctuary (Holy of Holies). 3Do not drag me away with the wicked
And with those who do evil,
Who speak peace with their neighbors,
While malice and mischief are in their hearts. 4Repay them according to their work and according to the evil of their practices;
Repay them according to the deeds of their hands;
Repay them what they deserve. 5Because they have no regard for the works of the LORD
Nor the deeds of His hands,
He will tear them down and not rebuild them. 6Blessed be the LORD,
Because He has heard the voice of my supplication. 7The LORD is my strength and my [impenetrable] shield;
My heart trusts [with unwavering confidence] in Him, and I am helped;
Therefore my heart greatly rejoices,
And with my song I shall thank Him and praise Him. 8The LORD is their [unyielding] strength,
And He is the fortress of salvation to His anointed. 9Save Your people and bless Your inheritance;
Be their shepherd also, and carry them forever.

Psalm 29
The Voice Of The LORD In The Storm.
A Psalm of David. 1Ascribe to the LORD, O sons of the mighty,
Ascribe to the LORD glory and strength. 2Ascribe to the LORD the glory due His name;
Worship the LORD in the beauty and majesty of His holiness [as the creator and source of holiness]. 3The voice of the LORD is upon the waters;
The God of glory thunders;
The LORD is over many waters. 4The voice of the LORD is powerful;
The voice of the LORD is full of majesty. 5The voice of the LORD breaks the cedars;
Yes, the LORD breaks in pieces the cedars of Lebanon. 6He makes Lebanon skip like a calf,
And Sirion (Mount Hermon) like a young, wild ox. 7The voice of the LORD rakes flames of fire (lightning). 8The voice of the LORD shakes the wilderness;
The LORD shakes the wilderness of Kadesh. 9The voice of the LORD makes the doe labor and give birth
And strips the forests bare;
And in His temple all are saying, “Glory!” 10The LORD sat as King at the flood;
Yes, the LORD sits as King forever. 11The LORD will give [unyielding and impenetrable] strength to His people;
The LORD will bless His people with peace.

Psalm 30
Thanksgiving For Deliverance From Death.
A Psalm; a Song at the Dedication of the House (Temple). A Psalm of David. 1I will extol and praise You, O LORD, for You have lifted me up,
And have not let my enemies rejoice over me. 2O LORD my God,
I cried to You for help, and You have healed me. 3O LORD, You have brought my life up from Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead);
You have kept me alive, so that I would not go down to the pit (grave). 4Sing to the LORD, O you His godly ones,
And give thanks at the mention of His holy name. 5For His anger is but for a moment,
His favor is for a lifetime.
Weeping may endure for a night,
But a shout of joy comes in the morning. 6As for me, in my prosperity I said,
“I shall never be moved.” 7By Your favor and grace, O LORD, you have made my mountain stand strong;
You hid Your face, and I was horrified. 8I called to You, O LORD,
And to the Lord I made supplication (specific request). 9“What profit is there in my blood (death), if I go down to the pit (grave)?
Will the dust praise You? Will it declare Your faithfulness [to man]? 10“Hear, O LORD, be gracious and show favor to me;
O LORD, be my helper.” 11You have turned my mourning into dancing for me;
You have taken off my sackcloth and clothed me with joy, 12That my soul may sing praise to You and not be silent.
O LORD my God, I will give thanks to You forever.

Psalm 31
A Psalm Of Complaint And Of Praise.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1In You, O LORD, I have placed my trust and taken refuge;
Let me never be ashamed;
In Your righteousness rescue me. 2Incline Your ear to me, deliver me quickly;
Be my rock of refuge,
And a strong fortress to save me. 3Yes, You are my rock and my fortress;
For Your name’s sake You will lead me and guide me. 4You will draw me out of the net that they have secretly laid for me,
For You are my strength and my stronghold. 5Into Your hand I commit my spirit;
You have redeemed me, O LORD, the God of truth and faithfulness. 6I hate those who pay regard to vain (empty, worthless) idols;
But I trust in the LORD [and rely on Him with unwavering confidence]. 7I will rejoice and be glad in Your steadfast love,
Because You have seen my affliction;
You have taken note of my life’s distresses, 8And You have not given me into the hand of the enemy;
You have set my feet in a broad place. 9Be gracious and compassionate to me, O LORD, for I am in trouble;
My eye is clouded and weakened by grief, my soul and my body also. 10For my life is spent with sorrow
And my years with sighing;
My strength has failed because of my iniquity,
And even my body has wasted away. 11Because of all my enemies I have become a reproach and disgrace,
Especially to my neighbors,
And an object of dread to my acquaintances;
Those who see me on the street run from me. 12I am forgotten like a dead man, out of mind;
I am like a broken vessel. 13For I have heard the slander and whispering of many,
Terror is on every side;
While they schemed together against me,
They plotted to take away my life. 14But as for me, I trust [confidently] in You and Your greatness, O LORD;
I said, “You are my God.” 15My times are in Your hands;
Rescue me from the hand of my enemies and from those who pursue and persecute me. 16Make Your face shine upon Your servant;
Save me in Your lovingkindness. 17Let me not be put to shame, O LORD, for I call on You;
Let the wicked (godless) be put to shame, let them be silent in Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead). 18Let the lying lips be mute,
Which speak insolently and arrogantly against the [consistently] righteous
With pride and contempt. 19How great is Your goodness,
Which You have stored up for those who [reverently] fear You,
Which You have prepared for those who take refuge in You,
Before the sons of man! 20In the secret place of Your presence You hide them from the plots and conspiracies of man;
You keep them secretly in a shelter (pavilion) from the strife of tongues. 21Blessed be the LORD,
For He has shown His marvelous favor and lovingkindness to me [when I was assailed] in a besieged city. 22As for me, I said in my alarm,
“I am cut off from Your eyes.”
Nevertheless You heard the voice of my supplications (specific requests)
When I cried to You [for help]. 23O love the LORD, all you His godly ones!
The LORD preserves the faithful [those with moral and spiritual integrity]
And fully repays the [self-righteousness of the] arrogant. 24Be strong and let your hearts take courage,
All you who wait for and confidently expect the LORD.

Psalm 32
Blessedness Of Forgiveness And Of Trust In God.
A Psalm of David. A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem. 1Blessed [fortunate, prosperous, favored by God] is he whose transgression is forgiven,
And whose sin is covered. 2Blessed is the man to whom the LORD does not impute wickedness,
And in whose spirit there is no deceit. 3When I kept silent about my sin, my body wasted away
Through my groaning all the day long. 4For day and night Your hand [of displeasure] was heavy upon me;
My energy (vitality, strength) was drained away as with the burning heat of summer. Selah. 5I acknowledged my sin to You,
And I did not hide my wickedness;
I said, “I will confess [all] my transgressions to the LORD”;
And You forgave the guilt of my sin. Selah. 6Therefore, let everyone who is godly pray to You [for forgiveness] in a time when You [are near and] may be found;
Surely when the great waters [of trial and distressing times] overflow they will not reach [the spirit in] him. 7You are my hiding place; You, LORD, protect me from trouble;
You surround me with songs and shouts of deliverance. Selah. 8I will instruct you and teach you in the way you should go;
I will counsel you [who are willing to learn] with My eye upon you. 9Do not be like the horse or like the mule which have no understanding,
Whose trappings include bridle and rein to hold them in check,
Otherwise they will not come near to you. 10Many are the sorrows of the wicked,
But he who trusts in and relies on the LORD shall be surrounded with compassion and lovingkindness. 11Be glad in the LORD and rejoice, you righteous [who actively seek right standing with Him];
Shout for joy, all you upright in heart.

Psalm 33
Praise To The Creator And Preserver.
1Rejoice in the LORD, you righteous ones;
Praise is becoming and appropriate for those who are upright [in heart—those with moral integrity and godly character]. 2Give thanks to the LORD with the lyre;
Sing praises to Him with the harp of ten strings. 3Sing to Him a new song;
Play skillfully [on the strings] with a loud and joyful sound. 4For the word of the LORD is right;
And all His work is done in faithfulness. 5He loves righteousness and justice;
The earth is full of the lovingkindness of the LORD. 6By the word of the LORD were the heavens made,
And all their host by the breath of His mouth. 7He gathers the waters of the sea together as in a wineskin;
He puts the deeps in storehouses. 8Let all the earth fear and worship the LORD;
Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of Him. 9For He spoke, and it was done;
He commanded, and it stood fast. 10The LORD nullifies the counsel of the nations;
He makes the thoughts and plans of the people ineffective. 11The counsel of the LORD stands forever,
The thoughts and plans of His heart through all generations. 12Blessed [fortunate, prosperous, and favored by God] is the nation whose God is the LORD,
The people whom He has chosen as His own inheritance. 13The LORD looks [down] from heaven;
He sees all the sons of man; 14From His dwelling place He looks closely
Upon all the inhabitants of the earth— 15He who fashions the hearts of them all,
Who considers and understands all that they do. 16The king is not saved by the great size of his army;
A warrior is not rescued by his great strength. 17A horse is a false hope for victory;
Nor does it deliver anyone by its great strength. 18Behold, the eye of the LORD is upon those who fear Him [and worship Him with awe-inspired reverence and obedience],
On those who hope [confidently] in His compassion and lovingkindness, 19To rescue their lives from death
And keep them alive in famine. 20We wait [expectantly] for the LORD;
He is our help and our shield. 21For in Him our heart rejoices,
Because we trust [lean on, rely on, and are confident] in His holy name. 22Let Your [steadfast] lovingkindness, O LORD, be upon us,
In proportion as we have hoped in You.

Psalm 34
The LORD, A Provider And The One Who Rescues Me.
A Psalm of David; when he pretended to be insane before Abimelech, who drove him out, and he went away. 1I will bless the LORD at all times;
His praise shall continually be in my mouth. 2My soul makes its boast in the LORD;
The humble and downtrodden will hear it and rejoice. 3O magnify the LORD with me,
And let us lift up His name together. 4I sought the LORD [on the authority of His word], and He answered me,
And delivered me from all my fears. 5They looked to Him and were radiant;
Their faces will never blush in shame or confusion. 6This poor man cried, and the LORD heard him
And saved him from all his troubles. 7The angel of the LORD encamps around those who fear Him [with awe-inspired reverence and worship Him with obedience],
And He rescues [each of] them. 😯 taste and see that the LORD [our God] is good;
How blessed [fortunate, prosperous, and favored by God] is the man who takes refuge in Him. 9O [reverently] fear the LORD, you His saints (believers, holy ones);
For to those who fear Him there is no want. 10The young lions lack [food] and grow hungry,
But they who seek the LORD will not lack any good thing. 11Come, you children, listen to me;
I will teach you to fear the LORD [with awe-inspired reverence and worship Him with obedience]. 12Who is the man who desires life
And loves many days, that he may see good? 13Keep your tongue from evil
And your lips from speaking deceit. 14Turn away from evil and do good;
Seek peace and pursue it. 15The eyes of the LORD are toward the righteous [those with moral courage and spiritual integrity]
And His ears are open to their cry. 16The face of the LORD is against those who do evil,
To cut off the memory of them from the earth. 17When the righteous cry [for help], the LORD hears
And rescues them from all their distress and troubles. 18The LORD is near to the heartbroken
And He saves those who are crushed in spirit (contrite in heart, truly sorry for their sin). 19Many hardships and perplexing circumstances confront the righteous,
But the LORD rescues him from them all. 20He keeps all his bones;
Not one of them is broken. 21Evil will cause the death of the wicked,
And those who hate the righteous will be held guilty and will be condemned. 22The LORD redeems the soul of His servants,
And none of those who take refuge in Him will be condemned.

Psalm 35
Prayer For Rescue From Enemies.
A Psalm of David. 1Contend, O LORD, with those who contend with me;
Fight against those who fight against me. 2Take hold of shield and buckler (small shield),
And stand up for my help. 3Draw also the spear and javelin to meet those who pursue me.
Say to my soul, “I am your salvation.” 4Let those be ashamed and dishonored who seek my life;
Let those be turned back [in defeat] and humiliated who plot evil against me. 5Let them be [blown away] like chaff before the wind [worthless, without substance],
With the angel of the LORD driving them on. 6Let their way be dark and slippery,
With the angel of the LORD pursuing and harassing them. 7For without cause they hid their net for me;
Without cause they dug a pit [of destruction] for my life. 8Let destruction come upon my enemy by surprise;
Let the net he hid for me catch him;
Into that very destruction let him fall. 9Then my soul shall rejoice in the LORD;
It shall rejoice in His salvation. 10All my bones will say, “LORD, who is like You,
Who rescues the afflicted from him who is too strong for him [to resist alone],
And the afflicted and the needy from him who robs him?” 11Malicious witnesses rise up;
They ask me of things that I do not know. 12They repay me evil for good,
To the sorrow of my soul. 13But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth (mourning garment);
I humbled my soul with fasting,
And I prayed with my head bowed on my chest. 14I behaved as if grieving for my friend or my brother;
I bowed down in mourning, as one who sorrows for his mother. 15But in my stumbling they rejoiced and gathered together [against me];
The slanderers whom I did not know gathered against me;
They slandered and reviled me without ceasing. 16Like godless jesters at a feast,
They gnashed at me with their teeth [in malice]. 17LORD, how long will You look on [without action]?
Rescue my life from their destructions,
My only life from the young lions. 18I will give You thanks in the great congregation;
I will praise You among a mighty people. 19Do not let those who are wrongfully my enemies rejoice over me;
Nor let those who hate me without cause wink their eye [maliciously]. 20For they do not speak peace,
But they devise deceitful words [half-truths and lies] against those who are quiet in the land. 21They open their mouths wide against me;
They say, “Aha, aha, our eyes have seen it!” 22You have seen this, O LORD; do not keep silent.
O Lord, do not be far from me. 23Wake Yourself up, and arise to my right
And to my cause, my God and my Lord. 24Judge me, O LORD my God, according to Your righteousness and justice;
And do not let them rejoice over me. 25Do not let them say in their heart, “Aha, that is what we wanted!”
Do not let them say, “We have swallowed him up and destroyed him.” 26Let those be ashamed and humiliated together who rejoice at my distress;
Let those be clothed with shame and dishonor who magnify themselves over me. 27Let them shout for joy and rejoice, who favor my vindication and want what is right for me;
Let them say continually, “Let the LORD be magnified, who delights and takes pleasure in the prosperity of His servant.” 28And my tongue shall declare Your righteousness (justice),
And Your praise all the day long.

Psalm 36
Wickedness Of Men And Lovingkindness Of God.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David the servant of the LORD. 1Transgression speaks [like an oracle] to the wicked (godless) [deep] within his heart;
There is no fear (dread) of God before his eyes. 2For he flatters and deceives himself in his own eyes
Thinking that his sinfulness will not be discovered and hated [by God]. 3The words of his mouth are wicked and deceitful;
He has ceased to be wise and to do good. 4He plans wrongdoing on his bed;
He sets himself on a path that is not good;
He does not reject or despise evil. 5Your lovingkindness and graciousness, O LORD, extend to the skies,
Your faithfulness [reaches] to the clouds. 6Your righteousness is like the mountains of God,
Your judgments are like the great deep.
O LORD, You preserve man and beast. 7How precious is Your lovingkindness, O God!
The children of men take refuge in the shadow of Your wings. 8They drink their fill of the abundance of Your house;
And You allow them to drink from the river of Your delights. 9For with You is the fountain of life [the fountain of life-giving water];
In Your light we see light. 10O continue Your lovingkindness to those who know You,
And Your righteousness (salvation) to the upright in heart. 11Do not let the foot of the proud [person] overtake me,
And do not let the hand of the wicked drive me away. 12There those who [are perverse and] do evil have fallen;
They have been thrust down and cannot rise.

Psalm 37
Security Of Those Who Trust In The LORD, And Insecurity Of The Wicked.
A Psalm of David. 1Do not worry because of evildoers,
Nor be envious toward wrongdoers; 2For they will wither quickly like the grass,
And fade like the green herb. 3Trust [rely on and have confidence] in the LORD and do good;
Dwell in the land and feed [securely] on His faithfulness. 4Delight yourself in the LORD,
And He will give you the desires and petitions of your heart. 5Commit your way to the LORD;
Trust in Him also and He will do it. 6He will make your righteousness [your pursuit of right standing with God] like the light,
And your judgment like [the shining of] the noonday [sun]. 7Be still before the LORD; wait patiently for Him and entrust yourself to Him;
Do not fret (whine, agonize) because of him who prospers in his way,
Because of the man who carries out wicked schemes. 8Cease from anger and abandon wrath;
Do not fret; it leads only to evil. 9For those who do evil will be cut off,
But those who wait for the LORD, they will inherit the land. 10For yet a little while and the wicked one will be gone [forever];
Though you look carefully where he used to be, he will not be [found]. 11But the humble will [at last] inherit the land
And will delight themselves in abundant prosperity and peace. 12The wicked plots against the righteous
And gnashes at him with his teeth. 13The Lord laughs at him [the wicked one—the one who oppresses the righteous],
For He sees that his day [of defeat] is coming. 14The wicked have drawn the sword and bent their bow
To cast down the afflicted and the needy,
To slaughter those who are upright in conduct [those with personal integrity and godly character]. 15The sword [of the ungodly] will enter their own heart,
And their bow will be broken. 16Better is the little of the righteous [who seek the will of God]
Than the abundance (riches) of many wicked (godless). 17For the arms of the wicked will be broken,
But the LORD upholds and sustains the righteous [who seek Him]. 18The LORD knows the days of the blameless,
And their inheritance will continue forever. 19They will not be ashamed in the time of evil,
And in the days of famine they will have plenty and be satisfied. 20But the wicked (ungodly) will perish,
And the enemies of the LORD will be like the glory of the pastures and like the fat of lambs [that is consumed in smoke],
They vanish—like smoke they vanish away. 21The wicked borrows and does not pay back,
But the righteous is gracious and kind and gives. 22For those blessed by God will [at last] inherit the land,
But those cursed by Him will be cut off. 23The steps of a [good and righteous] man are directed and established by the LORD,
And He delights in his way [and blesses his path]. 24When he falls, he will not be hurled down,
Because the LORD is the One who holds his hand and sustains him. 25I have been young and now I am old,
Yet I have not seen the righteous (those in right standing with God) abandoned
Or his descendants pleading for bread. 26All day long he is gracious and lends,
And his descendants are a blessing. 27Depart from evil and do good;
And you will dwell [securely in the land] forever. 28For the LORD delights in justice
And does not abandon His saints (faithful ones);
They are preserved forever,
But the descendants of the wicked will [in time] be cut off. 29The righteous will inherit the land
And live in it forever. 30The mouth of the righteous proclaims wisdom,
And his tongue speaks justice and truth. 31The law of his God is in his heart;
Not one of his steps will slip. 32The wicked lies in wait for the righteous
And seeks to kill him. 33The LORD will not leave him in his hand
Or let him be condemned when he is judged. 34Wait for and expect the LORD and keep His way,
And He will exalt you to inherit the land;
[In the end] when the wicked are cut off, you will see it. 35I have seen a wicked, violent man [with great power]
Spreading and flaunting himself like a cedar in its native soil, 36Yet he passed away, and lo, he was no more;
I sought him, but he could not be found. 37Mark the blameless man [who is spiritually complete], and behold the upright [who walks in moral integrity];
There is a [good] future for the man of peace [because a life of honor blesses one’s descendants]. 38As for transgressors, they will be completely destroyed;
The future of the wicked will be cut off. 39But the salvation of the righteous is from the LORD;
He is their refuge and stronghold in the time of trouble. 40The LORD helps them and rescues them;
He rescues them from the wicked and saves them,
Because they take refuge in Him.

Psalm 38
Prayer In Time Of Discipline.
A Psalm of David; to bring to remembrance. 1O LORD, do not rebuke me in Your wrath,
Nor discipline me in Your burning anger. 2For Your arrows have sunk into me and penetrate deeply,
And Your hand has pressed down on me and greatly disciplined me. 3There is no soundness in my flesh because of Your indignation;
There is no health in my bones because of my sin. 4For my iniquities have gone over my head [like the waves of a flood];
As a heavy burden they weigh too much for me. 5My wounds are loathsome and foul
Because of my foolishness. 6I am bent over and greatly bowed down;
I go about mourning all day long. 7For my sides are filled with burning,
And there is no health in my flesh. 8I am numb and greatly bruised [deadly cold and completely worn out];
I groan because of the disquiet and moaning of my heart. 9Lord, all my desire is before You;
And my sighing is not hidden from You. 10My heart throbs violently, my strength fails me;
And as for the light of my eyes, even that has also gone from me. 11My loved ones and my friends stand aloof from my plague;
And my neighbors stand far away. 12Those who seek my life lay snares for me,
And those who seek to injure me threaten mischievous things and destruction;
They devise treachery all the day long. 13But I, like a deaf man, do not hear;
I am like a mute man who does not open his mouth. 14Yes, I am like a man who does not hear,
In whose mouth are no arguments. 15For in You, O LORD, I hope;
You will answer, O Lord my God. 16For I pray, “May they not rejoice over me,
Who, when my foot slips, would boast against me.” 17For I am ready to fall;
My sorrow is continually before me. 18For I do confess my guilt and iniquity;
I am filled with anxiety because of my sin. 19But my [numerous] enemies are vigorous and strong,
And those who hate me without cause are many. 20They repay evil for good, they attack and try to kill me,
Because I follow what is good. 21Do not abandon me, O LORD;
O my God, do not be far from me. 22Make haste to help me,
O Lord, my Salvation.

Psalm 39
The Vanity Of Life.
To the Chief Musician; for Jeduthun. A Psalm of David. 1I said, “I will guard my ways
That I may not sin with my tongue;
I will muzzle my mouth
While the wicked are in my presence.” 2I was mute and silent [before my enemies],
I refrained even from good,
And my distress grew worse. 3My heart was hot within me.
While I was musing the fire burned;
Then I spoke with my tongue: 4“LORD, let me know my [life’s] end
And [to appreciate] the extent of my days;
Let me know how frail I am [how transient is my stay here]. 5“Behold, You have made my days as [short as] hand widths,
And my lifetime is as nothing in Your sight.
Surely every man at his best is a mere breath [a wisp of smoke, a vapor that vanishes]! Selah. 6“Surely every man walks around like a shadow [in a charade];
Surely they make an uproar for nothing;
Each one builds up riches, not knowing who will receive them. 7“And now, Lord, for what do I expectantly wait?
My hope [my confident expectation] is in You. 8“Save me from all my transgressions;
Do not make me the scorn and reproach of the [self-righteous, arrogant] fool. 9“I am mute, I do not open my mouth,
Because it is You who has done it. 10“Remove Your plague from me;
I am wasting away because of the conflict and opposition of Your hand. 11“With rebukes You discipline man for sin;
You consume like a moth what is precious to him;
Surely every man is a mere breath [a wisp of smoke, a vapor that vanishes]. Selah. 12“Hear my prayer, O LORD, and listen to my cry;
Do not be silent at my tears;
For I am Your temporary guest,
A sojourner like all my fathers. 13“O look away from me, that I may smile and again know joy
Before I depart and am no more.”

Psalm 40
God Sustains His Servant.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1I waited patiently and expectantly for the LORD;
And He inclined to me and heard my cry. 2He brought me up out of a horrible pit [of tumult and of destruction], out of the miry clay,
And He set my feet upon a rock, steadying my footsteps and establishing my path. 3He put a new song in my mouth, a song of praise to our God;
Many will see and fear [with great reverence]
And will trust confidently in the LORD. 4Blessed [fortunate, prosperous, and favored by God] is the man who makes the LORD his trust,
And does not regard the proud nor those who lapse into lies. 5Many, O LORD my God, are the wonderful works which You have done,
And Your thoughts toward us;
There is none to compare with You.
If I would declare and speak of your wonders,
They would be too many to count. 6Sacrifice and meal offering You do not desire, nor do You delight in them;
You have opened my ears and given me the capacity to hear [and obey Your word];
Burnt offerings and sin offerings You do not require. 7Then I said, “Behold, I come [to the throne];
In the scroll of the book it is written of me. 8“I delight to do Your will, O my God;
Your law is within my heart.” 9I have proclaimed good news of righteousness [and the joy that comes from obedience to You] in the great assembly;
Behold, I will not restrain my lips [from proclaiming Your righteousness],
As You know, O LORD. 10I have not concealed Your righteousness within my heart;
I have proclaimed Your faithfulness and Your salvation.
I have not concealed Your lovingkindness and Your truth from the great assembly. 11Do not withhold Your compassion and tender mercy from me, O LORD;
Your lovingkindness and Your truth will continually preserve me. 12For innumerable evils have encompassed me;
My sins have overtaken me, so that I am not able to see.
They are more numerous than the hairs of my head,
And my heart has failed me. 13Be pleased, O LORD, to save me;
O LORD, make haste to help me. 14Let those be ashamed and humiliated together
Who seek my life to destroy it;
Let those be turned back [in defeat] and dishonored
Who delight in my hurt. 15Let those be appalled and desolate because of their shame
Who say to me, “Aha, aha [rejoicing in my misfortune]!” 16Let all who seek You rejoice and be glad in You;
Let those who love Your salvation say continually,
“The LORD be magnified!” 17Even though I am afflicted and needy,
Still the Lord takes thought and is mindful of me.
You are my help and my rescuer.
O my God, do not delay.

Psalm 41
The Psalmist In Sickness Complains Of Enemies And False Friends.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1Blessed [by God’s grace and compassion] is he who considers the helpless;
The LORD will save him in the day of trouble. 2The LORD will protect him and keep him alive;
And he will be called blessed in the land;
You do not hand him over to the desire of his enemies. 3The LORD will sustain and strengthen him on his sickbed;
In his illness, You will restore him to health. 4As for me, I said, “O LORD, be gracious to me;
Heal my soul, for I have sinned against You.” 5My enemies speak evil of me, saying,
“When will he die and his name perish?” 6And when one comes to see me, he speaks empty words,
While his heart gathers malicious gossip [against me];
When he goes away, he tells it [everywhere]. 7All who hate me whisper together about me;
Against me they devise my hurt [imagining the worst for me], saying, 8“A wicked thing is poured out upon him and holds him;
And when he lies down, he will not rise up again.” 9Even my own close friend in whom I trusted,
Who ate my bread,
Has lifted up his heel against me [betraying me]. 10But You, O LORD, be gracious to me and restore me [to health],
So that I may repay them. 11By this I know that You favor and delight in me,
Because my enemy does not shout in triumph over me. 12As for me, You uphold me in my integrity,
And You set me in Your presence forever. 13Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
From everlasting to everlasting [from this age to the next, and forever].
Amen and Amen (so be it).

Psalm 42
Thirsting For God In Trouble And Exile.
To the Chief Musician. A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem, of the sons of Korah. 1As the deer pants [longingly] for the water brooks,
So my soul pants [longingly] for You, O God. 2My soul (my life, my inner self) thirsts for God, for the living God.
When will I come and see the face of God? 3My tears have been my food day and night,
While they say to me all day long, “Where is your God?” 4These things I [vividly] remember as I pour out my soul;
How I used to go along before the great crowd of people and lead them in procession to the house of God [like a choirmaster before his singers, timing the steps to the music and the chant of the song],
With the voice of joy and thanksgiving, a great crowd keeping a festival. 5Why are you in despair, O my soul?
And why have you become restless and disturbed within me?
Hope in God and wait expectantly for Him, for I shall again praise Him
For the help of His presence. 6O my God, my soul is in despair within me [the burden more than I can bear];
Therefore I will [fervently] remember You from the land of the Jordan
And the peaks of [Mount] Hermon, from Mount Mizar. 7Deep calls to deep at the [thundering] sound of Your waterfalls;
All Your breakers and Your waves have rolled over me. 8Yet the LORD will command His lovingkindness in the daytime,
And in the night His song will be with me,
A prayer to the God of my life. 9I will say to God my rock, “Why have You forgotten me?
Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?” 10As a crushing of my bones [with a sword], my adversaries taunt me,
While they say continually to me, “Where is your God?” 11Why are you in despair, O my soul?
Why have you become restless and disquieted within me?
Hope in God and wait expectantly for Him, for I shall yet praise Him,
The help of my countenance and my God.

Psalm 43
Prayer For Rescue.
1Judge and vindicate me, O God; plead my case against an ungodly nation.
O rescue me from the deceitful and unjust man! 2For You are the God of my strength [my stronghold—in whom I take refuge]; why have You rejected me?
Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of the enemy? 3O send out Your light and Your truth, let them lead me;
Let them bring me to Your holy hill
And to Your dwelling places. 4Then I will go to the altar of God,
To God, my exceeding joy;
With the lyre I will praise You, O God, my God! 5Why are you in despair, O my soul?
And why are you restless and disturbed within me?
Hope in God and wait expectantly for Him, for I shall again praise Him,
The help of my [sad] countenance and my God.

Psalm 44
Former Times Of Help And Present Troubles.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem. 1We have heard with our ears, O God,
Our fathers have told us
The work You did in their days,
In the days of old. 2You drove out the [pagan] nations with Your own hand;
Then you planted and established them (Israel);
[It was by Your power that] You uprooted the [pagan] peoples,
Then You spread them abroad. 3For our fathers did not possess the land [of Canaan] by their own sword,
Nor did their own arm save them,
But Your right hand and Your arm and the light of Your presence,
Because You favored and delighted in them. 4You are my King, O God;
Command victories and deliverance for Jacob (Israel). 5Through You we will gore our enemies [like a bull];
Through Your name we will trample down those who rise up against us. 6For I will not trust in my bow,
Nor will my sword save me. 7But You have saved us from our enemies,
And You have put them to shame and humiliated those who hate us. 8In God we have boasted all the day long,
And we will praise and give thanks to Your name forever. Selah. 9But now You have rejected us and brought us to dishonor,
And You do not go out with our armies [to lead us to victory]. 10You make us turn back from the enemy,
And those who hate us have taken spoil for themselves. 11You have made us like sheep to be eaten [as mutton]
And have scattered us [in exile] among the nations. 12You sell Your people cheaply,
And have not increased Your wealth by their sale. 13You have made us the reproach and taunt of our neighbors,
A scoffing and a derision to those around us. 14You make us a byword among the nations,
A laughingstock among the people. 15My dishonor is before me all day long,
And humiliation has covered my face, 16Because of the voice of the taunter and reviler,
Because of the presence of the enemy and the avenger. 17All this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten You,
Nor have we been false to Your covenant [which You made with our fathers]. 18Our heart has not turned back,
Nor have our steps wandered from Your path, 19Yet You have [distressingly] crushed us in the place of jackals
And covered us with [the deep darkness of] the shadow of death. 20If we had forgotten the name of our God
Or stretched out our hands to a strange god, 21Would not God discover this?
For He knows the secrets of the heart. 22But for Your sake we are killed all the day long;
We are considered as sheep to be slaughtered. 23Awake! Why do You sleep, O Lord?
Awaken, do not reject us forever. 24Why do You hide Your face
And forget our affliction and our oppression? 25For our life has melted away into the dust;
Our body clings to the ground. 26Rise up! Come be our help,
And ransom us for the sake of Your steadfast love.

Psalm 45
A Song Celebrating The King’s Marriage.
To the Chief Musician; set to the [tune of] “Lilies.” A Psalm of the sons of Korah. A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem. A Song of Love. 1My heart overflows with a good theme;
I address my psalm to the King.
My tongue is like the pen of a skillful writer. 2You are fairer than the sons of men;
Graciousness is poured upon Your lips;
Therefore God has blessed You forever. 3Strap Your sword on Your thigh, O mighty One,
In Your splendor and Your majesty! 4And in Your majesty ride on triumphantly
For the cause of truth and humility and righteousness;
Let Your right hand guide You to awesome things. 5Your arrows are sharp;
The peoples (nations) fall under You;
Your arrows pierce the hearts of the King’s enemies. 6Your throne, O God, is forever and ever;
The scepter of uprightness is the scepter of Your kingdom. 7You have loved righteousness (virtue, morality, justice) and hated wickedness;
Therefore God, your God, has anointed You
Above Your companions with the oil of jubilation. 8All Your garments are fragrant with myrrh, aloes and cassia;
From ivory palaces stringed instruments have made You glad. 9Kings’ daughters are among Your noble ladies;
At Your right hand stands the queen in gold from Ophir. 10Hear, O daughter, consider and incline your ear [to my instruction]:
Forget your people and your father’s house; 11Then the King will desire your beauty;
Because He is your Lord, bow down and honor Him. 12The daughter of Tyre will come with a gift;
The rich among the people will seek your favor. 13Glorious is the King’s daughter within [the palace];
Her robe is interwoven with gold. 14She will be brought to the King in embroidered garments;
The virgins, her companions who follow her,
Will be brought to You. 15With gladness and rejoicing will they be led;
They will enter into the King’s palace. 16In place of your fathers will be your sons;
You shall make princes in all the land. 17I will make Your name to be remembered in all generations;
Therefore the peoples will praise and give You thanks forever and ever.

Psalm 46
God The Refuge Of His People.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of the sons of Korah, set to soprano voices. A Song. 1God is our refuge and strength [mighty and impenetrable],
A very present and well-proved help in trouble. 2Therefore we will not fear, though the earth should change
And though the mountains be shaken and slip into the heart of the seas, 3Though its waters roar and foam,
Though the mountains tremble at its roaring. Selah. 4There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God,
The holy dwelling places of the Most High. 5God is in the midst of her [His city], she will not be moved;
God will help her when the morning dawns. 6The nations made an uproar, the kingdoms tottered and were moved;
He raised His voice, the earth melted. 7The LORD of hosts is with us;
The God of Jacob is our stronghold [our refuge, our high tower]. Selah. 8Come, behold the works of the LORD,
Who has brought desolations and wonders on the earth. 9He makes wars to cease to the end of the earth;
He breaks the bow into pieces and snaps the spear in two;
He burns the chariots with fire. 10“Be still and know (recognize, understand) that I am God.
I will be exalted among the nations! I will be exalted in the earth.” 11The LORD of hosts is with us;
The God of Jacob is our stronghold [our refuge, our high tower]. Selah.

Psalm 47
God The King Of The Earth.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. 1O clap your hands, all you people;
Shout to God with the voice of triumph and songs of joy. 2For the LORD Most High is to be feared [and worshiped with awe-inspired reverence and obedience];
He is a great King over all the earth. 3He subdues peoples under us
And nations under our feet. 4He chooses our inheritance for us,
The glory and excellence of Jacob whom He loves. Selah. 5God has ascended amid shouting,
The LORD with the sound of a trumpet. 6Sing praises to God, sing praises;
Sing praises to our King, sing praises. 7For God is the King of all the earth;
Sing praises in a skillful psalm and with understanding. 8God reigns over the nations;
God sits on His holy throne. 9The princes of the people have gathered together as the people of the God of Abraham,
For the shields of the earth belong to God;
He is highly exalted.

Psalm 48
The Beauty And Glory Of Zion.
A Song; a Psalm of the sons of Korah. 1Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised,
In the city of our God, His holy mountain. 2Fair and beautiful in elevation, the joy of all the earth,
Is Mount Zion [the City of David] in the far north,
The city of the great King. 3God, in her palaces,
Has made Himself known as a stronghold. 4For, lo, the kings assembled themselves,
They [came and] passed by together. 5They saw it, then they were amazed;
They were stricken with terror, they fled in alarm. 6Panic seized them there,
And pain, as that of a woman in childbirth. 7With the east wind
You shattered the ships of Tarshish. 8As we have heard, so have we seen
In the city of the LORD of hosts, in the city of our God:
God will establish her forever. Selah. 9We have thought of Your lovingkindness, O God,
In the midst of Your temple. 10As is Your name, O God,
So is Your praise to the ends of the earth;
Your right hand is full of righteousness (rightness, justice). 11Let Mount Zion be glad,
Let the daughters of Judah rejoice
Because of Your [righteous] judgments. 12Walk about Zion, go all around her;
Count her towers, 13Consider her ramparts,
Go through her palaces,
That you may tell the next generation [about her glory]. 14For this is God,
Our God forever and ever;
He will be our guide even until death.

Psalm 49
The Folly Of Trusting In Riches.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. 1Hear this, all peoples;
Listen carefully, all inhabitants of the world, 2Both low and high,
Rich and poor together: 3My mouth will speak wisdom,
And the meditation of my heart will be understanding. 4I will incline my ear and consent to a proverb;
On the lyre I will unfold my riddle. 5Why should I fear in the days of evil,
When the wickedness of those who would betray me surrounds me [on every side], 6Even those who trust in and rely on their wealth
And boast of the abundance of their riches? 7None of them can by any means redeem [either himself or] his brother,
Nor give to God a ransom for him— 8For the ransom of his soul is too costly,
And he should cease trying forever— 9So that he should live on eternally,
That he should never see the pit (grave) and undergo decay. 10For he sees that even wise men die;
The fool and the stupid alike perish
And leave their wealth to others. 11Their inward thought is that their houses will continue forever,
And their dwelling places to all generations;
They have named their lands after their own names [ignoring God]. 12But man, with all his [self] honor and pomp, will not endure;
He is like the beasts that perish. 13This is the fate of those who are foolishly confident,
And of those after them who approve [and are influenced by] their words. Selah. 14Like sheep they are appointed for Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead);
Death will be their shepherd;
And the upright shall rule over them in the morning,
And their form and beauty shall be for Sheol to consume,
So that they have no dwelling [on earth]. 15But God will redeem my life from the power of Sheol,
For He will receive me. Selah. 16Be not afraid when [an ungodly] man becomes rich,
When the wealth and glory of his house are increased; 17For when he dies he will carry nothing away;
His glory will not descend after him. 18Though while he lives he counts himself happy and prosperous—
And though people praise you when you do well for yourself— 19He shall go to the generation of his fathers;
They shall never again see the light. 20A man [who is held] in honor,
Yet who lacks [spiritual] understanding and a teachable heart, is like the beasts that perish.

Psalm 50
God The Judge Of The Righteous And The Wicked.
A Psalm of Asaph 1The mighty One, God, the LORD, has spoken,
And summoned the earth from the rising of the sun to its setting [from east to west]. 2Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty,
God has shone forth. 3May our God come and not keep silent;
Fire devours before Him,
And around Him a mighty tempest rages. 4He summons the heavens above,
And the earth, to judge His people: 5“Gather My godly ones to Me,
Those who have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice.” 6And the heavens declare His righteousness,
For God Himself is judge. Selah. 7“Hear, O My people, and I will speak;
O Israel, I will testify against you:
I am God, your God. 8“I do not reprove you for your sacrifices;
Your burnt offerings are continually before Me. 9“I will accept no young bull from your house
Nor male goat from your folds. 10“For every beast of the forest is Mine,
And the cattle on a thousand hills. 11“I know every bird of the mountains,
And everything that moves in the field is Mine. 12“If I were hungry, I would not tell you,
For the world and all it contains are Mine. 13“Shall I eat the flesh of bulls
Or drink the blood of male goats? 14“Offer to God the sacrifice of thanksgiving
And pay your vows to the Most High; 15Call on Me in the day of trouble;
I will rescue you, and you shall honor and glorify Me.” 16But to the wicked God says:
“What right have you to recite My statutes
Or to take My covenant on your lips? 17“For you hate instruction and discipline
And cast My words behind you [discarding them]. 18“When you see a thief, you are pleased with him and condone his behavior,
And you associate with adulterers. 19“You give your mouth to evil
And your tongue frames deceit. 20“You sit and speak against your brother;
You slander your own mother’s son. 21“These things you have done and I kept silent;
You thought that I was just like you.
Now I will reprimand and denounce you and state the case in order before your eyes. 22“Now consider this, you who forget God,
Or I will tear you in pieces, and there will be no one to rescue [you]. 23“He who offers a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving honors Me;
And to him who orders his way rightly [who follows the way that I show him],
I shall show the salvation of God.”

Psalm 51
A Contrite Sinner’s Prayer For Pardon.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David; when Nathan the prophet came to him after he had sinned with Bathsheba. 1Have mercy on me, O God, according to Your lovingkindness;
According to the greatness of Your compassion blot out my transgressions. 2Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness and guilt
And cleanse me from my sin. 3For I am conscious of my transgressions and I acknowledge them;
My sin is always before me. 4Against You, You only, have I sinned
And done that which is evil in Your sight,
So that You are justified when You speak [Your sentence]
And faultless in Your judgment. 5I was brought forth in [a state of] wickedness;
In sin my mother conceived me [and from my beginning I, too, was sinful]. 6Behold, You desire truth in the innermost being,
And in the hidden part [of my heart] You will make me know wisdom. 7Purify me with hyssop, and I will be clean;
Wash me, and I will be whiter than snow. 8Make me hear joy and gladness and be satisfied;
Let the bones which You have broken rejoice. 9Hide Your face from my sins
And blot out all my iniquities. 10Create in me a clean heart, O God,
And renew a right and steadfast spirit within me. 11Do not cast me away from Your presence
And do not take Your Holy Spirit from me. 12Restore to me the joy of Your salvation
And sustain me with a willing spirit. 13Then I will teach transgressors Your ways,
And sinners shall be converted and return to You. 14Rescue me from bloodguiltiness, O God, the God of my salvation;
Then my tongue will sing joyfully of Your righteousness and Your justice. 15O Lord, open my lips,
That my mouth may declare Your praise. 16For You do not delight in sacrifice, or else I would give it;
You are not pleased with burnt offering. 17My [only] sacrifice [acceptable] to God is a broken spirit;
A broken and contrite heart [broken with sorrow for sin, thoroughly penitent], such, O God, You will not despise. 18By Your favor do good to Zion;
May You rebuild the walls of Jerusalem. 19Then will You delight in the sacrifices of righteousness,
In burnt offering and whole burnt offering;
Then young bulls will be offered on Your altar.

Psalm 52
Futility Of Boastful Wickedness.
To the Chief Musician. A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem. A Psalm of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, “David has come to the house of Ahimelech.” 1Why do you boast of evil, O mighty man?
The lovingkindness of God endures all day long. 2Your tongue devises destruction,
Like a sharp razor, working deceitfully. 3You love evil more than good,
And falsehood more than speaking what is right. Selah. 4You love all words that devour,
O deceitful tongue. 5But God will break you down forever;
He will take you away and tear you away from your tent,
And uproot you from the land of the living. Selah. 6The righteous will see it and fear,
And will [scoffingly] laugh, saying, 7“Look, [this is] the man who would not make God his strength [his stronghold and fortress],
But trusted in the abundance of his riches,
Taking refuge in his wealth.” 8But as for me, I am like a green olive tree in the house of God;
I trust [confidently] in the lovingkindness of God forever and ever. 9I will thank You forever, because You have done it, [You have rescued me and kept me safe].
I will wait on Your name, for it is good, in the presence of Your godly ones.

Psalm 53
Folly And Wickedness Of Men.
To the Chief Musician; in a mournful strain. A skillful song, or didactic or reflective poem of David. 1The [empty-headed] fool has said in his heart, “There is no God.”
They are corrupt and evil, and have committed repulsive injustice;
There is no one who does good. 2God has looked down from heaven upon the children of men
To see if there is anyone who understands,
Who seeks after God [who requires Him, who longs for Him as essential to life]. 3Every one of them has turned aside and fallen away;
Together they have become filthy and corrupt;
There is no one who does good, no, not even one. 4Have workers of wickedness no knowledge or no understanding?
They eat up My people as though they ate bread
And have not called upon God. 5There they were, in great terror and dread, where there had been no terror or dread;
For God scattered the bones of him who besieged you;
You have put them to shame, because God has rejected them. 6Oh, that the salvation of Israel would come out of Zion!
When God restores [the fortunes of] His people,
Let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad.

Psalm 54
Prayer For Defense Against Enemies.
To the Chief Musician; with stringed instruments. A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem, of David, when the Ziphites went and told Saul, “David is hiding among us.” 1Save me, O God, by Your name;
And vindicate me by Your [wondrous] power. 2Hear my prayer, O God;
Listen to the words of my mouth. 3For strangers have risen against me
And violent men have sought my life;
They have not set God before them. Selah. 4Behold, God is my helper and ally;
The Lord is the sustainer of my soul [my upholder]. 5He will pay back the evil to my enemies;
In Your faithfulness destroy them. 6With a freewill offering I will sacrifice to You;
I will give thanks and praise Your name, O LORD, for it is good. 7For He has rescued me from every trouble,
And my eye has looked with satisfaction (triumph) on my enemies.

Psalm 55
Prayer For The Destruction Of The Treacherous.
To the Chief Musician; with stringed instruments. A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem, of David. 1Listen to my prayer, O God,
And do not hide Yourself from my plea. 2Listen to me and answer me;
I am restless and distraught in my complaint and distracted 3Because of the voice of the enemy,
Because of the pressure of the wicked;
For they bring down trouble on me,
And in anger they persecute me. 4My heart is in anguish within me,
And the terrors of death have fallen upon me. 5Fear and trembling have come upon me;
Horror has overwhelmed me. 6And I say, “Oh, that I had wings like a dove!
I would fly away and be at rest. 7“I would wander far away,
I would lodge in the [peace of the] wilderness. Selah. 8“I would hurry to my refuge [my tranquil shelter far away]
From the stormy wind and from the tempest.” 9Confuse [my enemies], O Lord, divide their tongues [destroying their schemes],
For I have seen violence and strife in the city. 10Day and night they go around her walls;
Wickedness and mischief are in her midst. 11Destruction is within her;
Oppression and deceit do not depart from her streets and market places. 12For it is not an enemy who taunts me—
Then I could bear it;
Nor is it one who has hated me who insolently exalts himself against me—
Then I could hide from him. 13But it is you, a man my equal and my counsel,
My companion and my familiar friend; 14We who had sweet fellowship together,
Who walked to the house of God in company. 15Let death come deceitfully upon them;
Let them go down alive to Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead),
For evil [of every kind] is in their dwelling and in their hearts, in their midst. 16As for me, I shall call upon God,
And the LORD will save me. 17Evening and morning and at noon I will complain and murmur,
And He will hear my voice. 18He has redeemed my life in peace from the battle that was against me,
For there were many against me. 19God will hear and humble them,
Even He who sits enthroned from old— Selah.
Because in them there has been no change [of heart],
And they do not fear God [at all]. 20He [my companion] has put out his hands against those who were at peace with him;
He has broken his covenant [of friendship and loyalty]. 21The words of his mouth were smoother than butter,
But his heart was hostile;
His words were softer than oil,
Yet they were drawn swords. 22Cast your burden on the LORD [release it] and He will sustain and uphold you;
He will never allow the righteous to be shaken (slip, fall, fail). 23But You, O God, will bring down the wicked to the pit of destruction;
Men of blood and treachery will not live out half their days.
But I will [boldly and unwaveringly] trust in You.

Psalm 56
Supplication For Rescue And Grateful Trust In God.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “Silent Dove Among Those Far Away.” A Mikhtam of David. [A record of memorable thoughts] when the Philistines seized him in Gath. 1Be gracious to me, O God, for man has trampled on me;
All day long the adversary oppresses and torments me. 2My enemies have trampled upon me all day long,
For they are many who fight proudly against me. 3When I am afraid,
I will put my trust and faith in You. 4In God, whose word I praise;
In God I have put my trust;
I shall not fear.
What can mere man do to me? 5All day long they twist my words and say hurtful things;
All their thoughts are against me for evil. 6They attack, they hide and lurk,
They watch my steps,
As they have [expectantly] waited to take my life. 7Cast them out because of their wickedness.
In anger bring down the peoples, O God! 8You have taken account of my wanderings;
Put my tears in Your bottle.
Are they not recorded in Your book? 9Then my enemies will turn back in the day when I call;
This I know, that God is for me. 10In God, whose word I praise,
In the LORD, whose word I praise, 11In God have I put my trust and confident reliance; I will not be afraid.
What can man do to me? 12Your vows are binding upon me, O God;
I will give thank offerings to You. 13For You have rescued my soul from death,
Yes, and my feet from stumbling,
So that I may walk before God
In the light of life.

Psalm 57
Prayer For Rescue From Persecutors.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “Do Not Destroy.” A Mikhtam of David. [A record of memorable thoughts of David] when he fled from Saul in the cave. 1Be gracious to me, O God, be gracious and merciful to me,
For my soul finds shelter and safety in You,
And in the shadow of Your wings I will take refuge and be confidently secure
Until destruction passes by. 2I will cry to God Most High,
Who accomplishes all things on my behalf [for He completes my purpose in His plan]. 3He will send from heaven and save me;
He calls to account him who tramples me down. Selah.
God will send out His lovingkindness and His truth. 4My life is among lions;
I must lie among those who breathe out fire—
The sons of men whose teeth are spears and arrows,
And their tongue a sharp sword. 5Be exalted above the heavens, O God;
Let Your glory and majesty be over all the earth. 6They set a net for my steps;
My very life was bowed down.
They dug a pit before me;
Into the midst of it they themselves have fallen. Selah. 7My heart is steadfast, O God, my heart is steadfast and confident!
I will sing, yes, I will sing praises [to You]! 8Awake, my glory!
Awake, harp and lyre!
I will awaken the dawn. 9I will praise and give thanks to You, O Lord, among the people;
I will sing praises to You among the nations. 10For Your faithfulness and lovingkindness are great, reaching to the heavens,
And Your truth to the clouds. 11Be exalted above the heavens, O God;
Let Your glory and majesty be over all the earth.

Psalm 58
Prayer For The Punishment Of The Wicked.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “Do Not Destroy.” A Mikhtam of David. [A record of memorable thoughts of David]. 1Do you indeed speak righteousness, O gods (heavenly beings)?
Do you judge fairly, O sons of men? 2No, in your heart you devise wrongdoing;
On earth you deal out the violence of your hands. 3The wicked are estranged from the womb;
These go astray from birth, speaking lies [even twisted partial truths]. 4Their poison is like the venom of a serpent;
They are like the deaf horned viper that stops up its ear, 5So that it does not listen to the voice of charmers,
Or of the skillful enchanter casting [cunning] spells. 6O God, break their teeth in their mouth;
Break out the fangs of the young lions, O LORD. 7Let them flow away like water that runs off;
When he aims his arrows, let them be as headless shafts. 8Let them be as a snail which melts away (secretes slime) as it goes along,
Like the miscarriage of a woman which never sees the sun. 9Before your cooking pots can feel the fire of thorns [burning under them as fuel],
He will sweep them away with a whirlwind, the green and the burning ones alike. 10The [unyieldingly] righteous will rejoice when he sees the vengeance [of God];
He will wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. 11Men will say, “Surely there is a reward for the righteous;
Surely there is a God who judges on the earth.”

Psalm 59
Prayer For Rescue From Enemies.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “Do Not Destroy.” A Mikhtam of David, [a record of memorable thoughts] when Saul sent men to watch his house in order to kill him. 1Deliver me from my enemies, O my God;
Set me securely on an inaccessibly high place away from those who rise up against me. 2Deliver me from those who practice wrongdoing,
And save me from bloodthirsty men. 3Look! They lie in wait for my life;
Fierce and powerful men [are uniting together to] launch an attack against me,
Not for my wrongdoing nor for any sin of mine, O LORD. 4They run and set themselves against me though there is no guilt in me;
Stir Yourself to meet and help me, and see [what they are doing]! 5You, O LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel,
Arise to punish all the nations;
Spare no one and do not be merciful to any who treacherously plot evil. Selah. 6They return at evening, they howl and snarl like dogs,
And go [prowling] around the city. 7Look how they belch out [insults] with their mouths;
Swords [of sarcasm, ridicule, slander, and lies] are in their lips,
For they say, “Who hears us?” 8But You, O LORD, will laugh at them [in scorn];
You scoff at and deride all the nations. 9O [God] my strength, I will watch for You;
For God is my stronghold [my refuge, my protector, my high tower]. 10My God in His [steadfast] lovingkindness will meet me;
God will let me look triumphantly on my enemies [who lie in wait for me]. 11Do not kill them, or my people will forget;
Scatter them and make them wander [endlessly] back and forth by Your power, and bring them down,
O Lord our shield! 12For the sin of their mouths and the words of their lips,
Let them even be trapped in their pride,
And on account of the curses and lies which they tell. 13Destroy them in wrath, destroy them so that they may be no more;
Let them know that God rules over Jacob (Israel)
To the ends of the earth. Selah. 14They return at evening, they howl and snarl like dogs,
And go [prowling] around the city. 15They wander around for food [to devour]
And growl all night if they are not satisfied. 16But as for me, I will sing of Your mighty strength and power;
Yes, I will sing joyfully of Your lovingkindness in the morning;
For You have been my stronghold
And a refuge in the day of my distress. 17To You, O [God] my strength, I will sing praises;
For God is my stronghold [my refuge, my protector, my high tower], the God who shows me [steadfast] lovingkindness.

Psalm 60
Lament Over Defeat In Battle, And Prayer For Help.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “The Lily of the Testimony.” A Mikhtam of David [intended to record memorable thoughts and] to teach; when he struggled with the Arameans of Mesopotamia and the Arameans of Zobah, and when Joab returned and struck twelve thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt. 1O God, You have rejected us and cast us off. You have broken [down our defenses and scattered] us;
You have been angry; O restore us and turn again to us. 2You have made the land quake, You have split it open;
Heal its rifts, for it shakes and totters. 3You have made Your people experience hardship;
You have given us wine to drink that makes us stagger and fall. 4You have set up a banner for those who fear You [with awe-inspired reverence and submissive wonder—a banner to shield them from attack],
A banner that may be displayed because of the truth. Selah. 5That Your beloved ones may be rescued,
Save with Your right hand and answer us. 6God has spoken in His holiness [in His promises]:
“I will rejoice, I will divide [the land of] Shechem and measure out the Valley of Succoth [west to east]. 7“Gilead is Mine, and Manasseh is Mine;
Ephraim is My helmet;
Judah is My scepter. 8“Moab is My washbowl;
Over Edom I shall throw My shoe [in triumph];
Over Philistia I raise the shout [of victory].” 9Who will bring me into the besieged city [of Petra]?
Who will lead me to Edom? 10Have You not rejected us, O God?
And will You not go out with our armies? 11Give us help against the enemy,
For the help of man is worthless (ineffectual, without purpose). 12Through God we will have victory,
For He will trample down our enemies.

Psalm 61
Confidence In God’s Protection.
To the Chief Musician; on stringed instruments. A Psalm of David. 1Hear my cry, O God;
Listen to my prayer. 2From the end of the earth I call to You, when my heart is overwhelmed and weak;
Lead me to the rock that is higher than I [a rock that is too high to reach without Your help]. 3For You have been a shelter and a refuge for me,
A strong tower against the enemy. 4Let me dwell in Your tent forever;
Let me take refuge in the shelter of Your wings. Selah. 5For You have heard my vows, O God;
You have given me the inheritance of those who fear Your name [with reverence]. 6You will prolong the king’s life [adding days upon days];
His years will be like many generations. 7He will sit enthroned forever before [the face of] God;
Appoint lovingkindness and truth to watch over and preserve him. 8So I will sing praise to Your name forever,
Paying my vows day by day.

Psalm 62
God Alone A Refuge From Treachery And Oppression.
To the Chief Musician; to Jeduthun [Ethan, the noted musician, founder of an official musical family]. A Psalm of David. 1For God alone my soul waits in silence;
From Him comes my salvation. 2He alone is my rock and my salvation,
My defense and my strong tower; I will not be shaken or disheartened. 3How long will you attack a man
So that you may murder him, all of you,
Like a leaning wall, like a tottering fence? 4They consult only to throw him down from his high position [to dishonor him];
They delight in lies.
They bless with [the words of] their mouths,
But inwardly they curse. Selah. 5For God alone my soul waits in silence and quietly submits to Him,
For my hope is from Him. 6He only is my rock and my salvation;
My fortress and my defense, I will not be shaken or discouraged. 7On God my salvation and my glory rest;
He is my rock of [unyielding] strength, my refuge is in God. 8Trust [confidently] in Him at all times, O people;
Pour out your heart before Him.
God is a refuge for us. Selah. 9Men of low degree are only a breath (emptiness), and men of [high] rank are a lie (delusion).
In the balances they go up [because they have no measurable weight or value];
They are together lighter than a breath. 10Do not trust in oppression,
And do not vainly hope in robbery;
If riches increase, do not set your heart on them. 11God has spoken once,
Twice I have heard this:
That power belongs to God. 12Also to You, O Lord, belong lovingkindness and compassion,
For You compensate every man according to [the value of] his work.

Psalm 63
The Thirsting Soul Satisfied In God.
A Psalm of David; when he was in the wilderness of Judah. 1O God, You are my God; with deepest longing I will seek You;
My soul [my life, my very self] thirsts for You, my flesh longs and sighs for You,
In a dry and weary land where there is no water. 2So I have gazed upon You in the sanctuary,
To see Your power and Your glory. 3Because Your lovingkindness is better than life,
My lips shall praise You. 4So will I bless You as long as I live;
I will lift up my hands in Your name. 5My soul [my life, my very self] is satisfied as with marrow and fatness,
And my mouth offers praises [to You] with joyful lips. 6When I remember You on my bed,
I meditate and thoughtfully focus on You in the night watches, 7For You have been my help,
And in the shadow of Your wings [where I am always protected] I sing for joy. 8My soul [my life, my very self] clings to You;
Your right hand upholds me. 9But those who seek my life to destroy it
Will [be destroyed and] go into the depths of the earth [into the underworld]. 10They will be given over to the power of the sword;
They will be a prey for foxes. 11But the king will rejoice in God;
Everyone who swears by Him [honoring the true God, acknowledging His authority and majesty] will glory,
For the mouths of those who speak lies will be stopped.

Psalm 64
Prayer For Protection From Secret Enemies.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1Hear my voice, O God, in my complaint;
Guard my life from the terror of the enemy. 2Hide me from the secret counsel and conspiracy of the ungodly,
From the scheming of those who do wrong, 3Who have sharpened their tongues like a sword.
They aim venomous words as arrows, 4To shoot from ambush at the blameless [one];
Suddenly they shoot at him, without fear. 5They encourage themselves in [their pursuit of] an evil agenda;
They talk of laying snares secretly;
They say, “Who will discover us?” 6They devise acts of injustice, saying,
“We are ready with a well-conceived plan.”
For the inward thought and the heart of a man are deep (mysterious, unsearchable). 7But God will shoot them with an [unexpected] arrow;
Suddenly they will be wounded. 8So they will be caused to stumble;
Their own tongue is against them;
All who gaze at them will shake the head [in scorn]. 9Then all men will fear [God’s judgment];
They will declare the work of God,
And they will consider and wisely acknowledge what He has done. 10The righteous will rejoice in the LORD and take refuge in Him;
All the upright in heart will glory and offer praise.

Psalm 65
God’s Abundant Favor To Earth And Man.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. A Song. 1To You belongs silence [the submissive wonder of reverence], and [it bursts into] praise in Zion, O God;
And to You the vow shall be performed. 2O You who hear prayer,
To You all mankind comes. 3Wickedness and guilt prevail against me;
Yet as for our transgressions,
You forgive them [removing them from Your sight]. 4Blessed is the one whom You choose and bring near
To dwell in Your courts.
We will be filled with the goodness of Your house,
Your holy temple. 5By awesome and wondrous things You answer us in righteousness, O God of our salvation,
You who are the trust and hope of all the ends of the earth and of the farthest sea; 6Who creates the mountains by His strength,
Being clothed with power, 7Who stills the roaring of the seas,
The roaring of their waves,
And the tumult of the peoples, 8So they who dwell at the ends of the earth stand in awe of Your signs [the evidence of Your presence].
You make the dawn and the sunset shout for joy. 9You visit the earth and make it overflow [with water];
You greatly enrich it;
The stream of God is full of water;
You provide their grain, when You have prepared the earth. 10You water its furrows abundantly,
You smooth its ridges;
You soften it with showers,
You bless its growth. 11You crown the year with Your bounty,
And Your paths overflow. 12The pastures of the wilderness drip [with dew],
And the hills are encircled with joy. 13The meadows are clothed with flocks
And the valleys are covered with grain;
They shout for joy and they sing.

Psalm 66
Praise For God’s Mighty Deeds And For His Answer To Prayer.
To the Chief Musician. A Song. A Psalm. 1Shout joyfully to God, all the earth; 2Sing of the honor and glory and magnificence of His name;
Make His praise glorious. 3Say to God, “How awesome and fearfully glorious are Your works!
Because of the greatness of Your power Your enemies will pretend to be obedient to You. 4“All the earth will [bow down to] worship You [in submissive wonder],
And will sing praises to You;
They will praise Your name in song.” Selah. 5Come and see the works of God,
He is awesome in His deeds toward the children of men. 6He turned the sea into dry land;
They crossed through the river on foot;
There we rejoiced in Him. 7Who rules by His might forever,
His eyes keep watch on the nations;
Do not let the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah. 8Bless our God, O peoples,
And make the sound of His praise be heard abroad, 9Who keeps us among the living,
And does not allow our feet to slip or stumble. 10For You have tested us, O God;
You have refined us as silver is refined. 11You brought us into the net;
You laid a heavy burden [of servitude] on us. 12You made men (charioteers) ride over our heads [in defeat];
We went through fire and through water,
Yet You brought us out into a [broad] place of abundance [to be refreshed]. 13I shall come into Your house with burnt offerings;
I shall pay You my vows, 14Which my lips uttered
And my mouth spoke as a promise when I was in distress. 15I shall offer to You burnt offerings of fat lambs,
With the [sweet] smoke of rams;
I will offer bulls with male goats. Selah. 16Come and hear, all who fear God [and worship Him with awe-inspired reverence and obedience],
And I will tell what He has done for me. 17I cried aloud to Him;
He was highly praised with my tongue. 18If I regard sin and baseness in my heart [that is, if I know it is there and do nothing about it],
The Lord will not hear [me]; 19But certainly God has heard [me];
He has given heed to the voice of my prayer. 20Blessed be God,
Who has not turned away my prayer
Nor His lovingkindness from me.

Psalm 67
The Nations Exhorted To Praise God.
To the Chief Musician; on stringed instruments. A Psalm. A Song. 1God be gracious and kind-hearted to us and bless us,
And make His face shine [with favor] on us— Selah. 2That Your way may be known on earth,
Your salvation and deliverance among all nations. 3Let the peoples praise You, O God;
Let all the peoples praise You. 4Let the nations be glad and sing for joy,
For You will judge the people fairly
And guide the nations on earth. Selah. 5Let the peoples praise You, O God;
Let all the peoples praise You. 6The earth has yielded its harvest [as evidence of His approval];
God, our God, blesses us. 7God blesses us,
And all the ends of the earth shall fear Him [with awe-inspired reverence and submissive wonder].

Psalm 68
The God Of Sinai And Of The Sanctuary.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. A Song. 1Let God arise, and His enemies be scattered;
Let those who hate Him flee before Him. 2As smoke is driven away, so drive them away;
As wax melts before the fire,
So let the wicked and guilty perish before [the presence of] God. 3But let the righteous be glad; let them be in good spirits before God,
Yes, let them rejoice with delight. 4Sing to God, sing praises to His name;
Lift up a song for Him who rides through the desert—
His name is the LORD—be in good spirits before Him. 5A father of the fatherless and a judge and protector of the widows,
Is God in His holy habitation. 6God makes a home for the lonely;
He leads the prisoners into prosperity,
Only the stubborn and rebellious dwell in a parched land. 7O God, when You went out before Your people,
When You marched through the wilderness, Selah. 8The earth trembled;
The heavens also poured down rain at the presence of God;
Sinai itself trembled at the presence of God, the God of Israel. 9You, O God, sent abroad plentiful rain;
You confirmed Your inheritance when it was parched and weary. 10Your flock found a dwelling place in it;
O God, in Your goodness You provided for the poor. 11The Lord gives the command [to take Canaan];
The women who proclaim the good news are a great host (army); 12“The kings of the [enemies’] armies flee, they flee,
And the beautiful woman who remains at home divides the spoil [left behind].” 13When you lie down [to rest] among the sheepfolds,
You [Israel] are like the wings of a dove [of victory] overlaid with silver,
Its feathers glistening with gold [trophies taken from the enemy]. 14When the Almighty scattered [the Canaanite] kings in the land of Canaan,
It was snowing on Zalmon. 15A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan;
A [high] mountain of many summits is Mount Bashan [rising east of the Jordan]. 16Why do you look with envy, mountains with many peaks,
At the mountain [of the city of Zion] which God has desired for His dwelling place?
Yes, the LORD will dwell there forever. 17The chariots of God are myriads, thousands upon thousands;
The Lord is among them as He was at Sinai, in holiness. 18You have ascended on high, You have led away captive Your captives;
You have received gifts among men,
Even from the rebellious also, that the LORD God may dwell there. 19Blessed be the Lord, who bears our burden day by day,
The God who is our salvation! Selah. 20God is to us a God of acts of salvation;
And to GOD the Lord belong escapes from death [setting us free]. 21Surely God will shatter the head of His enemies,
The hairy scalp of one who goes on in his guilty ways. 22The Lord said, “I will bring your enemies back from Bashan;
I will bring them back from the depths of the [Red] Sea, 23That your foot may crush them in blood,
That the tongue of your dogs may have its share from your enemies.” 24They have seen Your [solemn] procession, O God,
The procession of my God, my King, into the sanctuary [in holiness]. 25The singers go in front, the players of instruments last;
Between them the maidens playing on tambourines. 26Bless God in the congregations, [give thanks, gratefully praise Him],
The LORD, you who are from [Jacob] the fountain of Israel. 27The youngest is there, Benjamin, ruling them,
The princes of Judah and their company [the southern tribes],
The princes of Zebulun and the princes of Naphtali [the northern tribes]. 28Your God has commanded your strength [your power in His service and your resistance to temptation];
Show Yourself strong, O God, who acted on our behalf. 29Because of Your temple at Jerusalem
[Pagan] kings will bring gifts to You [out of respect]. 30Rebuke the beasts [living] among the reeds [in Egypt],
The herd of bulls (the leaders) with the calves of the peoples;
Trampling underfoot the pieces of silver;
He has scattered the peoples who delight in war. 31Princes and envoys shall come from Egypt;
Ethiopia will quickly stretch out her hands [with the offerings of submission] to God. 32Sing to God, O kingdoms of the earth,
Sing praises to the Lord! Selah. 33To Him who rides in the highest heavens, the ancient heavens,
Behold, He sends out His voice, a mighty and majestic voice. 34Ascribe strength to God;
His majesty is over Israel
And His strength is in the skies. 35O God, You are awesome and profoundly majestic from Your sanctuary;
The God of Israel gives strength and power to His people.
Blessed be God!

Psalm 69
A Cry Of Distress And Imprecation On Adversaries.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “Lilies.” A Psalm of David. 1Save me, O God,
For the waters have threatened my life [they have come up to my neck]. 2I have sunk in deep mire, where there is no foothold;
I have come into deep waters, where a flood overwhelms me. 3I am weary with my crying; my throat is parched;
My eyes fail while I wait [with confident expectation] for my God. 4Those who hate me without cause are more than the hairs of my head;
Those who would destroy me are powerful, being my enemies wrongfully;
I am forced to restore what I did not steal. 5O God, You know my folly;
My wrongs are not hidden from You. 6Do not let those who wait [confidently] for You be ashamed through me, O Lord GOD of hosts;
Do not let those who seek You [as necessary for life itself] be dishonored through me, O God of Israel, 7Because for Your sake I have borne reproach;
Confusion and dishonor have covered my face. 8I have become estranged from my brothers
And an alien to my mother’s sons. 9For zeal for Your house has consumed me,
And the [mocking] insults of those who insult You have fallen on me. 10When I wept and humbled myself with fasting,
It became my reproach. 11When I made sackcloth my clothing [as one in mourning],
I became a byword [a mere object of scorn] to them. 12They who sit in the [city’s] gate talk about me and mock me,
And I am the song of the drunkards. 13But as for me, my prayer is to You, O LORD, at an acceptable and opportune time;
O God, in the greatness of Your favor and in the abundance of Your lovingkindness,
Answer me with truth [that is, the faithfulness of Your salvation]. 14Rescue me from the mire and do not let me sink;
Let me be rescued from those who hate me and from the deep waters. 15Do not let the floodwater overwhelm me,
Nor the deep waters swallow me up,
Nor the pit [of Sheol] shut its mouth over me. 16Answer me, O LORD, for Your lovingkindness is sweet and good and comforting;
According to the greatness of Your compassion, turn to me. 17Do not hide Your face from Your servant,
For I am in distress; answer me quickly. 18Draw near to my soul and redeem it;
Ransom me because of my enemies [so that they do not delight in my distress]. 19You know my reproach and my shame and my dishonor [how I am insulted];
My adversaries are all before You [each one fully known]. 20Reproach and insults have broken my heart and I am so sick.
I looked for sympathy, but there was none,
And for comforters, but I found none. 21They (self-righteous hypocrites) also gave me gall [poisonous and bitter] for my food,
And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. 22May their table [with all its abundance and luxury] become a snare [to them];
And when they are in peace [secure at their sacrificial feasts], may it become a trap. 23May their eyes be dimmed so that they cannot see,
And make their loins shake continually [in terror and weakness]. 24Pour out Your indignation on them,
And let [the fierceness of] Your burning anger overtake them. 25May their encampment be desolate;
May no one dwell in their tents. 26For they have persecuted him whom You have struck,
And they tell of the pain of those whom You have pierced and wounded. 27Add [unforgiven] iniquity to their iniquity [in Your book],
And may they not come into Your righteousness. 28May they be blotted out of the book of life [and their lives come to an end]
And may they not be recorded with the righteous (those in right standing with God). 29But I am sorrowful and in pain;
May Your salvation, O God, set me [securely] on high. 30I will praise the name of God with song
And magnify Him with thanksgiving. 31And it will please the LORD better than an ox
Or a young bull with horns and hoofs. 32The humble have seen it and are glad;
You who seek God [requiring Him as your greatest need], let your heart revive and live. 33For the LORD hears the needy
And does not despise His who are prisoners. 34Let heaven and earth praise Him,
The seas and everything that moves in them. 35For God will save Zion and rebuild the cities of Judah,
That His servants may remain there and possess it. 36The descendants of His servants will inherit it,
And those who love His name will dwell in it.

Psalm 70
Prayer For Help Against Persecutors.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance. 1O God, come quickly to save me;
O LORD, come quickly to help me! 2Let those be ashamed and humiliated
Who seek my life;
Let them be turned back and humiliated
Who delight in my hurt. 3Let them be turned back because of their shame and disgrace
Who say, “Aha, aha!” 4May all those who seek You [as life’s first priority] rejoice and be glad in You;
May those who love Your salvation say continually,
“Let God be magnified!” 5But I am afflicted and needy;
Come quickly to me, O God!
You are my help and my rescuer;
O LORD, do not delay.

Psalm 71
Prayer Of An Old Man For Rescue.
1In you, O LORD, I have put my trust and confidently taken refuge;
Let me never be put to shame. 2In Your righteousness deliver me and rescue me;
Incline Your ear to me and save me. 3Be to me a rock of refuge and a sheltering stronghold to which I may continually come;
You have given the commandment to save me,
For You are my rock and my fortress. 4Rescue me, O my God, from the hand of the wicked (godless),
From the grasp of the unrighteous and ruthless man. 5For You are my hope;
O Lord GOD, You are my trust and the source of my confidence from my youth. 6Upon You have I relied and been sustained from my birth;
You are He who took me from my mother’s womb and You have been my benefactor from that day.
My praise is continually of You. 7I am as a wonder to many,
For You are my strong refuge. 8My mouth is filled with Your praise
And with Your glory all day long. 9Do not cast me off nor send me away in the time of old age;
Do not abandon me when my strength fails and I am weak. 10For my enemies have spoken against me;
Those who watch for my life have consulted together, 11Saying, “God has abandoned him;
Pursue and seize him, for there is no one to rescue him.” 12O God, do not be far from me;
O my God, come quickly to help me! 13Let those who attack my life be ashamed and consumed;
Let them be covered with reproach and dishonor, who seek to injure me. 14But as for me, I will wait and hope continually,
And will praise You yet more and more. 15My mouth shall tell of Your righteousness
And of Your [deeds of] salvation all day long,
For their number is more than I know. 16I will come with the mighty acts of the Lord GOD [and in His strength];
I will make mention of Your righteousness, Yours alone. 17O God, You have taught me from my youth,
And I still declare Your wondrous works and miraculous deeds. 18And even when I am old and gray-headed, O God, do not abandon me,
Until I declare Your [mighty] strength to this generation,
Your power to all who are to come. 19Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the [height of the] heavens,
You who have done great things;
O God, who is like You, [who is Your equal]? 20You who have shown me many troubles and distresses
Will revive and renew me again,
And will bring me up again from the depths of the earth. 21May You increase my greatness (honor)
And turn to comfort me. 22I will also praise You with the harp,
Your truth and faithfulness, O my God;
To You I will sing praises with the lyre,
O Holy One of Israel. 23My lips will shout for joy when I sing praises to You,
And my soul, which You have redeemed. 24My tongue also will speak of Your righteousness all day long;
For they are ashamed, for they are humiliated who seek my injury.

Psalm 72
The Reign Of The Righteous King.
A Psalm of Solomon. 1Give the king [knowledge of] Your judgments, O God,
And [the spirit of] Your righteousness to the king’s son [to guide all his ways]. 2May he judge Your people with righteousness,
And Your afflicted with justice. 3The mountains will bring peace and prosperity to the people,
And the hills, in [the establishment of] righteousness. 4May he bring justice to the poor among the people,
Save the children of the needy
And crush the oppressor, 5Let them fear You [with awe-inspired reverence and worship You with obedience] while the sun endures,
And as long as the moon [reflects light], throughout all generations. 6May he come down like rain on the mown grass,
Like showers that water the earth. 7In his days may the righteous flourish,
And peace abound until the moon is no more. 8May he also rule from sea to sea
And from the River [Euphrates] to the ends of the earth. 9The nomads of the desert will bow before him,
And his enemies will lick the dust. 10The kings of Tarshish and of the islands will bring offerings;
The kings of Sheba and Seba will offer gifts. 11Yes, all kings will bow down before him,
All nations will serve him. 12For he will rescue the needy when he cries for help,
The afflicted and abused also, and him who has no helper. 13He will have compassion on the poor and needy,
And he will save the lives of the needy. 14He will redeem their life from oppression and fraud and violence,
And their blood will be precious in His sight. 15So may he live, and may the gold of Sheba be given to him;
And let them pray for him continually;
Let them bless and praise him all day long. 16There will be an abundance of grain in the soil on the top of the mountains;
Its fruit will wave like [the cedars of] Lebanon,
And those of the city will flourish like grass of the earth. 17May his name endure forever;
May his name continue as long as the sun;
And let men bless themselves by him;
Let all nations call him blessed. 18Blessed be the LORD God, the God of Israel,
Who alone does wonderful things. 19Blessed be His glorious name forever;
And may the whole earth be filled with His glory.
Amen and Amen. 20The prayers of David son of Jesse are ended.

Psalm 73
The End Of The Wicked Contrasted With That Of The Righteous.
A Psalm of Asaph. 1Truly God is good to Israel,
To those who are pure in heart. 2But as for me, my feet came close to stumbling,
My steps had almost slipped. 3For I was envious of the arrogant
As I saw the prosperity of the wicked. 4For there are no pains in their death,
Their body is fat and pampered. 5They are not in trouble as other men,
Nor are they plagued like mankind. 6Therefore pride is their necklace;
Violence covers them like a garment [like a long, luxurious robe]. 7Their eye bulges from fatness [they have more than the heart desires];
The imaginations of their mind run riot [with foolishness]. 8They mock and wickedly speak of oppression;
They speak loftily [with malice]. 9They set their mouth against the heavens,
And their tongue swaggers through the earth. 10Therefore his people return to this place,
And waters of abundance [offered by the irreverent] are [blindly] drunk by them. 11They say, “How does God know?
Is there knowledge [of us] with the Most High?” 12Behold, these are the ungodly,
Who always prosper and are at ease [in the world]; they have increased in wealth. 13Surely then in vain I have cleansed my heart
And washed my hands in innocence. 14For all the day long have I been stricken,
And punished every morning. 15If I had said, “I will say this,” [and expressed my feelings],
I would have betrayed the generation of Your children. 16When I considered how to understand this,
It was too great an effort for me and too painful 17Until I came into the sanctuary of God;
Then I understood [for I considered] their end. 18Surely You set the wicked-minded and immoral on slippery places;
You cast them down to destruction. 19How they are destroyed in a moment!
They are completely swept away by sudden terrors! 20Like a dream [which seems real] until one awakens,
O Lord, when stirred, [You observe the wicked], You will despise their image. 21When my heart was embittered
And I was pierced within [as with the fang of an adder], 22Then I was senseless and ignorant;
I was like a beast before You. 23Nevertheless I am continually with You;
You have taken hold of my right hand. 24You will guide me with Your counsel,
And afterward receive me to honor and glory. 25Whom have I in heaven [but You]?
And besides You, I desire nothing on earth. 26My flesh and my heart may fail,
But God is the rock and strength of my heart and my portion forever. 27For behold, those who are far from You will perish;
You have destroyed all those who are unfaithful and have abandoned You. 28But as for me, it is good for me to draw near to God;
I have made the Lord GOD my refuge and placed my trust in Him,
That I may tell of all Your works.

Psalm 74
An Appeal Against The Devastation Of The Land By The Enemy.
A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem, of Asaph. 1O God, why have You rejected us forever?
Why does Your anger smoke against the sheep of Your pasture? 2Remember Your congregation, which You have purchased of old,
Which You have redeemed to be the tribe of Your inheritance;
Remember Mount Zion, where You have dwelt. 3Turn your footsteps [quickly] toward the perpetual ruins;
The enemy has damaged everything within the sanctuary. 4In the midst of Your meeting place Your enemies have roared [with their battle cry];
They have set up their own emblems for signs [of victory]. 5It seems as if one had lifted up
An axe in a forest of trees [to set a record of destruction]. 6And now all the carved work [of the meeting place]
They smash with hatchets and hammers. 7They have burned Your sanctuary to the ground;
They have profaned the dwelling place of Your name. 8They said in their heart, “Let us completely subdue them.”
They have burned all the meeting places of God in the land. 9We do not see our symbols;
There is no longer any prophet [to guide us],
Nor does any among us know for how long. 10O God, how long will the adversary scoff?
Is the enemy to revile Your name forever? 11Why do You withdraw Your hand, even Your right hand [from judging the enemy]?
Remove Your hand from Your chest, destroy them! 12Yet God is my King of old,
Working salvation in the midst of the earth. 13You divided the [Red] Sea by Your strength;
You broke the heads of the sea monsters in the waters. 14You crushed the heads of Leviathan (Egypt);
You gave him as food for the creatures of the wilderness. 15You broke open fountains and streams;
You dried up ever-flowing rivers. 16The day is Yours, the night also is Yours;
You have established and prepared the [heavenly] light and the sun. 17You have defined and established all the borders of the earth [the divisions of land and sea and of the nations];
You have made summer and winter. 18Remember this, O LORD, the enemy has scoffed,
And a foolish and impious people has spurned Your name. 19Oh, do not hand over the soul of your turtledove to the wild beast;
Do not forget the life of Your afflicted forever. 20Consider the covenant [You made with Abraham],
For the dark places of the land are full of the habitations of violence. 21Let not the oppressed return dishonored;
Let the afflicted and needy praise Your name. 22Arise, O God, plead Your own cause;
Remember how the foolish man scoffs at You all day long. 23Do not forget the [clamoring] voices of Your adversaries,
The uproar of those who rise against You, which ascends continually [to Your ears].

Psalm 75
God Abases The Proud, But Exalts The Righteous.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “Do Not Destroy.” A Psalm of Asaph. A Song. 1We give thanks and praise to You, O God, we give thanks,
For Your [wonderful works declare that Your] name is near;
People declare Your wonders. 2“When I select an appointed time,
I will judge with equity,” [says the LORD]. 3“The earth and all the inhabitants of it melt [in tumultuous times].
It is I who will steady its pillars. Selah. 4“I said to the arrogant, ‘Do not boast;’
And to the wicked, ‘Do not lift up the horn [of self-glorification]. 5‘Do not lift up your [defiant and aggressive] horn on high,
Do not speak with a stiff neck.’” 6For not from the east, nor from the west,
Nor from the desert comes exaltation. 7But God is the Judge;
He puts down one and lifts up another. 8For a cup [of His wrath] is in the hand of the LORD, and the wine foams;
It is well mixed and fully spiced, and He pours out from it;
And all the wicked of the earth must drain it and drink down to its dregs. 9But as for me, I will declare it and rejoice forever;
I will sing praises to the God of Jacob. 10All the horns of the wicked He will cut off,
But the horns of the righteous will be lifted up.

Psalm 76
The Victorious Power Of The God Of Jacob.
To the Chief Musician; on stringed instruments. A Psalm of Asaph. A Song. 1God is known in Judah;
His name is great in Israel. 2His tabernacle is in Salem (Jerusalem);
His dwelling place is in Zion. 3There He broke the flaming arrows,
The shield, the sword, and the weapons of war. Selah. 4You are glorious and resplendent,
More majestic than the mountains of prey. 5The stouthearted have been stripped of their spoil,
They have slept the sleep [of death];
And none of the warriors could use his hands. 6At Your rebuke, O God of Jacob,
Both rider and horse were cast into a dead sleep [of death]. 7You, even You, are to be feared [with the submissive wonder of reverence];
Who may stand in Your presence when once You are angry? 8You caused judgment to be heard from heaven;
The earth feared and was quiet 9When God arose to [establish] judgment,
To save all the humble of the earth. Selah. 10For the wrath of man shall praise You;
With a remnant of wrath You will clothe and arm Yourself. 11Make vows to the LORD your God and fulfill them;
Let all who are around Him bring gifts to Him who is to be feared [with awe-inspired reverence]. 12He will cut off the spirit of princes;
He is awesome and feared by the kings of the earth.

Psalm 77
Comfort In Trouble From Recalling God’s Mighty Deeds.
To the Chief Musician; according to Jeduthun [one of David’s three chief musicians, founder of an official musical family]. A Psalm of Asaph. 1My voice rises to God, and I will cry aloud;
My voice rises to God, and He will hear me. 2In the day of my trouble I [desperately] sought the Lord;
In the night my hand was stretched out [in prayer] without weariness;
My soul refused to be comforted. 3I remember God; then I am disquieted and I groan;
I sigh [in prayer], and my spirit grows faint. Selah. 4You have held my eyelids open;
I am so troubled that I cannot speak. 5I have considered the ancient days,
The years [of prosperity] of long, long ago. 6I will remember my song in the night;
I will meditate with my heart,
And my spirit searches: 7Will the Lord reject forever?
And will He never be favorable again? 8Has His lovingkindness ceased forever?
Have His promises ended for all time? 9Has God forgotten to be gracious?
Or has He in anger withdrawn His compassion? Selah. 10And I said, “This is my grief,
That the right hand of the Most High has changed [and His lovingkindness is withheld].” 11I will [solemnly] remember the deeds of the LORD;
Yes, I will [wholeheartedly] remember Your wonders of old. 12I will meditate on all Your works
And thoughtfully consider all Your [great and wondrous] deeds. 13Your way, O God, is holy [far from sin and guilt].
What god is great like our God? 14You are the [awesome] God who works [powerful] wonders;
You have demonstrated Your power among the people. 15You have with Your [great] arm redeemed Your people,
The sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah. 16The waters [of the Red Sea] saw You, O God;
The waters saw You, they were in anguish;
The deeps also trembled. 17The clouds poured down water;
The skies sent out a sound [of rumbling thunder];
Your arrows (lightning) flashed here and there. 18The voice of Your thunder was in the whirlwind;
The lightnings illumined the world;
The earth trembled and shook. 19Your way [of escape for Your people] was through the sea,
And Your paths through the great waters,
And Your footprints were not traceable. 20You led Your people like a flock
By the hand of Moses and Aaron [to the promised goal].

Psalm 78
God’s Guidance Of His People In Spite Of Their Unfaithfulness.
A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem, of Asaph. 1Listen, O my people, to my teaching;
Incline your ears to the words of my mouth [and be willing to learn]. 2I will open my mouth in a parable [to instruct using examples];
I will utter dark and puzzling sayings of old [that contain important truth]— 3Which we have heard and known,
And our fathers have told us. 4We will not hide them from their children,
But [we will] tell to the generation to come the praiseworthy deeds of the LORD,
And [tell of] His great might and power and the wonderful works that He has done. 5For He established a testimony (a specific precept) in Jacob
And appointed a law in Israel,
Which He commanded our fathers
That they should teach to their children [the great facts of God’s transactions with Israel], 6That the generation to come might know them, that the children still to be born
May arise and recount them to their children, 7That they should place their confidence in God
And not forget the works of God,
But keep His commandments, 8And not be like their fathers—
A stubborn and rebellious generation,
A generation that did not prepare its heart to know and follow God,
And whose spirit was not faithful to God. 9The sons of Ephraim were armed as archers and carrying bows,
Yet they turned back in the day of battle. 10They did not keep the covenant of God
And refused to walk according to His law; 11And they forgot His [incredible] works
And His miraculous wonders that He had shown them. 12He did marvelous things in the sight of their fathers
In the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan [where Pharaoh resided]. 13He divided the [Red] Sea and allowed them to pass through it,
And He made the waters stand up like [water behind] a dam. 14In the daytime He led them with a cloud
And all the night with a light of fire. 15He split rocks in the wilderness
And gave them abundant [water to] drink like the ocean depths. 16He brought streams also from the rock [at Rephidim and Kadesh]
And caused waters to run down like rivers. 17Yet they still continued to sin against Him
By rebelling against the Most High in the desert. 18And in their hearts they put God to the test
By asking for food according to their [selfish] appetite. 19Then they spoke against God;
They said, “Can God prepare [food for] a table in the wilderness? 20“Behold, He struck the rock so that waters gushed out
And the streams overflowed;
Can He give bread also?
Or will He provide meat for His people?” 21Therefore, when the LORD heard, He was full of wrath;
A fire was kindled against Jacob,
And His anger mounted up against Israel, 22Because they did not believe in God [they did not rely on Him, they did not adhere to Him],
And they did not trust in His salvation (His power to save). 23Yet He commanded the clouds from above
And opened the doors of heaven; 24And He rained down manna upon them to eat
And gave them the grain of heaven. 25Man ate the bread of angels;
God sent them provision in abundance. 26He caused the east wind to blow in the heavens
And by His [unlimited] power He guided the south wind. 27He rained meat upon them like the dust,
And winged birds (quail) like the sand of the seas. 28And He let them fall in the midst of their camp,
Around their tents. 29So they ate and were well filled,
He gave them what they craved. 30Before they had satisfied their desire,
And while their food was in their mouths, 31The wrath of God rose against them
And killed some of the strongest of them,
And subdued the choice young men of Israel. 32In spite of all this they still sinned,
For they did not believe in His wonderful and extraordinary works. 33Therefore He consumed their days like a breath [in emptiness and futility]
And their years in sudden terror. 34When He killed [some of] them, then those remaining sought Him,
And they returned [to Him] and searched diligently for God [for a time]. 35And they remembered that God was their rock,
And the Most High God their Redeemer. 36Nevertheless they flattered Him with their mouths
And lied to Him with their tongues. 37For their heart was not steadfast toward Him,
Nor were they faithful to His covenant. 38But He, the source of compassion and lovingkindness, forgave their wickedness and did not destroy them;
Many times He restrained His anger
And did not stir up all His wrath. 39For He [graciously] remembered that they were mere [human] flesh,
A wind that goes and does not return. 40How often they rebelled against Him in the wilderness
And grieved Him in the desert! 41Again and again they tempted God,
And distressed the Holy One of Israel. 42They did not remember [the miracles worked by] His [powerful] hand,
Nor the day when He redeemed them from the enemy, 43How He worked His miracles in Egypt
And His wonders in the field of Zoan [where Pharaoh resided], 44And turned their rivers into blood,
And their streams, so that they could not drink. 45He sent among them swarms of flies which devoured them,
And frogs which destroyed them. 46He also gave their crops to the grasshopper,
And the fruit of their labor to the locust. 47He destroyed their vines with [great] hailstones
And their sycamore trees with frost. 48He gave over their cattle also to the hailstones,
And their flocks and herds to thunderbolts. 49He sent upon them His burning anger,
His fury and indignation and distress,
A band of angels of destruction [among them]. 50He leveled a path for His anger [to give it free run];
He did not spare their souls from death,
But turned over their lives to the plague. 51He killed all the firstborn in Egypt,
The first and best of their strength in the tents [of the land of the sons] of Ham. 52But God led His own people forward like sheep
And guided them in the wilderness like [a good shepherd with] a flock. 53He led them safely, so that they did not fear;
But the sea engulfed their enemies. 54So He brought them to His holy land,
To this mountain [Zion] which His right hand had acquired. 55He also drove out the nations before the sons of Israel
And allotted their land as an inheritance, measured out and partitioned;
And He had the tribes of Israel dwell in their tents [the tents of those who had been dispossessed]. 56Yet they tempted and rebelled against the Most High God
And did not keep His testimonies (laws). 57They turned back and acted unfaithfully like their fathers;
They were twisted like a warped bow [that will not respond to the archer’s aim]. 58For they provoked Him to [righteous] anger with their high places [devoted to idol worship]
And moved Him to jealousy with their carved images [by denying Him the love, worship, and obedience that is rightfully and uniquely His]. 59When God heard this, He was filled with [righteous] wrath;
And utterly rejected Israel, [greatly hating her ways], 60So that He abandoned the tabernacle at Shiloh,
The tent in which He had dwelled among men, 61And gave up His strength and power (the ark of the covenant) into captivity,
And His glory into the hand of the enemy (the Philistines). 62He also handed His people over to the sword,
And was infuriated with His inheritance (Israel). 63The fire [of war] devoured His young men,
And His [bereaved] virgins had no wedding songs. 64His priests [Hophni and Phinehas] fell by the sword,
And His widows could not weep. 65Then the Lord awakened as from sleep,
Like a [mighty] warrior who awakens from the sleep of wine [fully conscious of his power]. 66He drove His enemies backward;
He subjected them to lasting shame and dishonor. 67Moreover, He rejected the tent of Joseph,
And did not choose the tribe of Ephraim [in which the tabernacle stood]. 68But He chose the tribe of Judah [as Israel’s leader],
Mount Zion, which He loved [to replace Shiloh as His capital]. 69And He built His sanctuary [exalted] like the heights [of the heavens],
Like the earth which He has established forever. 70He also chose David His servant
And took him from the sheepfolds; 71From tending the ewes with nursing young He brought him
To shepherd Jacob His people,
And Israel His inheritance. 72So David shepherded them according to the integrity of his heart;
And guided them with his skillful hands.

Psalm 79
A Lament Over The Destruction Of Jerusalem, And Prayer For Help.
A Psalm of Asaph. 1O God, the nations have invaded [the land of Your people] Your inheritance;
They have defiled Your sacred temple;
They have laid Jerusalem in ruins. 2They have given the dead bodies of Your servants as food to the birds of the heavens,
The flesh of Your godly ones to the beasts of the earth. 3They have poured out their blood like water all around Jerusalem,
And there was no one to bury them. 4We have become an object of taunting to our neighbors [because of our humiliation],
A derision and mockery to those who encircle us. 5How long, O LORD? Will You be angry forever?
Will Your jealousy [which cannot endure a divided allegiance] burn like fire? 6Pour out Your wrath on the [Gentile] nations that do not know You,
And on the kingdoms that do not call on Your name. 7For they have devoured Jacob
And made his pasture desolate. 😯 do not remember against us the sins and guilt of our forefathers.
Let Your compassion and mercy come quickly to meet us,
For we have been brought very low. 9Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of Your name;
Rescue us, forgive us our sins for Your name’s sake. 10Why should the [Gentile] nations say, “Where is their God?”
Let there be known [without delay] among the nations in our sight [and to this generation],
Your vengeance for the blood of Your servants which has been poured out. 11Let the groaning and sighing of the prisoner come before You;
According to the greatness of Your power keep safe those who are doomed to die. 12And return into the lap of our neighbors sevenfold
The taunts with which they have taunted You, O Lord. 13So we Your people, the sheep of Your pasture,
Will give You thanks forever;
We will declare and publish Your praise from generation to generation.

Psalm 80
God Implored To Rescue His People From Their Calamities.
To the Chief Musician; set to [the tune of] “Lilies, a Testimony.” A Psalm of Asaph. 1Hear us O Shepherd of Israel,
You who lead Joseph like a flock;
You who sit enthroned above the cherubim [of the ark of the covenant], shine forth! 2Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, stir up Your power
And come to save us! 3Restore us, O God;
Cause Your face to shine on us [with favor and approval], and we will be saved. 4O LORD God of hosts,
How long will You be angry with the prayers of Your people? 5You have fed them the bread of tears,
And You have made them drink [bitter] tears in abundance. 6You make us an object of contention to our neighbors,
And our enemies laugh [at our suffering] among themselves. 7Restore us, O God of hosts;
And cause Your face to shine on us [with favor and approval], and we will be saved. 8You uprooted a vine (Israel) from Egypt;
You drove out the [Canaanite] nations and planted the vine [in Canaan]. 9You cleared away the ground before it,
And it took deep root and filled the land. 10The mountains were covered with its shadow,
And its branches were like the cedars of God. 11Israel sent out its branches to the [Mediterranean] Sea,
And its branches to the [Euphrates] River. 12Why have You broken down its walls and hedges,
So that all who pass by pick its fruit? 13A boar from the woods eats it away,
And the insects of the field feed on it. 14Turn again [in favor to us], O God of hosts;
Look down from heaven and see, and take care of this vine, 15Even the stock which Your right hand has planted,
And [look down on] the son that You have reared and strengthened for Yourself. 16It is burned with fire, it is cut down;
They perish at the rebuke of Your [angry] appearance. 17Let Your hand be upon the man of Your right hand,
Upon the son of man whom You have made strong for Yourself. 18Then we shall not turn back from You;
Revive us and we will call on Your name. 19Restore us, O LORD God of hosts;
Cause Your face to shine on us [in favor and approval], and we shall be saved.

Psalm 81
God’s Goodness And Israel’s Waywardness.
To the Chief Musician; set to the Philistine lute. A Psalm of Asaph. 1Sing aloud to God our strength;
Shout for joy to the God of Jacob (Israel). 2Raise a song, sound the timbrel,
The sweet sounding lyre with the harp. 3Blow the trumpet at the New Moon,
At the full moon, on our feast day. 4For this is a statute for Israel,
An ordinance of the God of Jacob. 5He established it for a testimony in Joseph
When He went throughout the land of Egypt.
I heard the language [of One whom] I did not know, saying, 6“I removed the burden from his shoulder;
His hands were freed from the basket. 7“You called in [the time of] trouble and I rescued you;
I answered you in the secret place of thunder;
I tested you at the waters of Meribah. Selah. 8“Hear, O My people, and I will admonish you—
O Israel, if you would listen to Me! 9“Let there be no strange god among you,
Nor shall you worship any foreign god. 10“I am the LORD your God,
Who brought you up from the land of Egypt.
Open your mouth wide and I will fill it. 11“But My people would not listen to My voice,
And Israel did not [consent to] obey Me. 12“So I gave them up to the stubbornness of their heart,
To walk in [the path of] their own counsel. 13“Oh, that My people would listen to Me,
That Israel would walk in My ways! 14“Then I would quickly subdue and humble their enemies
And turn My hand against their adversaries; 15Those who hate the LORD would pretend obedience to Him and cringe before Him,
And their time of punishment would be forever. 16“But I would feed Israel with the finest of the wheat;
And with honey from the rock I would satisfy you.”

Psalm 82
Unjust Judgments Rebuked.
A Psalm of Asaph. 1God stands in the divine assembly;
He judges among the gods (divine beings). 2How long will you judge unjustly
And show partiality to the wicked? Selah. 3Vindicate the weak and fatherless;
Do justice and maintain the rights of the afflicted and destitute. 4Rescue the weak and needy;
Rescue them from the hand of the wicked. 5The rulers do not know nor do they understand;
They walk on in the darkness [of complacent satisfaction];
All the foundations of the earth [the fundamental principles of the administration of justice] are shaken. 6I said, “You are gods;
Indeed, all of you are sons of the Most High. 7“Nevertheless you will die like men
And fall like any one of the princes.” 8Arise, O God, judge the earth!
For to You belong all the nations.

Psalm 83
God Implored To Confound His Enemies.
A Song. A Psalm of Asaph. 1Do not keep silent, O God;
Do not hold Your peace or be still, O God. 2For behold, Your enemies are in tumult,
And those who hate You have raised their heads [in hatred of You]. 3They concoct crafty schemes against Your people,
And conspire together against Your hidden and precious ones. 4They have said, “Come, and let us wipe them out as a nation;
Let the name of Israel be remembered no more.” 5For they have conspired together with one mind;
Against You they make a covenant— 6The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites,
Of Moab and the Hagrites, 7Gebal and Ammon and Amalek,
Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre. 8Assyria also has joined with them;
They have helped the children of Lot [the Ammonites and the Moabites] and have been an arm [of strength] to them. Selah. 9Deal with them as [You did] with Midian,
As with Sisera and Jabin at the brook of Kishon, 10Who were destroyed at En-dor,
Who became like dung for the earth. 11Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb
And all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna, 12Who said, “Let us possess for ourselves
The pastures of God.” 13O my God, make them like whirling dust,
Like chaff before the wind [worthless and without substance]. 14Like fire consumes the forest,
And like the flame sets the mountains on fire, 15So pursue them with Your tempest
And terrify them with [the violence of] Your storm. 16Fill their faces with shame and disgrace,
That they may [persistently] seek Your name, O LORD. 17Let them be ashamed and dismayed forever;
Yes, let them be humiliated and perish, 18That they may know that You alone, whose name is the LORD,
Are the Most High over all the earth.

Psalm 84
Longing For The Temple Worship.
To the Chief Musician; set to a Philistine lute. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. 1How lovely are Your dwelling places,
O LORD of hosts! 2My soul (my life, my inner self) longs for and greatly desires the courts of the LORD;
My heart and my flesh sing for joy to the living God. 3The bird has found a house,
And the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young—
Even Your altars, O LORD of hosts,
My King and my God. 4Blessed and greatly favored are those who dwell in Your house and Your presence;
They will be singing Your praises all the day long. Selah. 5Blessed and greatly favored is the man whose strength is in You,
In whose heart are the highways to Zion. 6Passing through the Valley of Weeping (Baca), they make it a place of springs;
The early rain also covers it with blessings. 7They go from strength to strength [increasing in victorious power];
Each of them appears before God in Zion. 😯 LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer;
Listen, O God of Jacob! Selah. 9See our shield, O God,
And look at the face of Your anointed [the king as Your representative]. 10For a day in Your courts is better than a thousand [anywhere else];
I would rather stand [as a doorkeeper] at the threshold of the house of my God
Than to live [at ease] in the tents of wickedness. 11For the LORD God is a sun and shield;
The LORD bestows grace and favor and honor;
No good thing will He withhold from those who walk uprightly. 12O LORD of hosts,
How blessed and greatly favored is the man who trusts in You [believing in You, relying on You, and committing himself to You with confident hope and expectation].

Psalm 85
Prayer For God’s Mercy Upon The Nation.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. 1O LORD, You have [at last] shown favor to Your land [of Canaan];
You have restored [from Babylon] the captives of Jacob (Israel). 2You have forgiven the wickedness of Your people;
You have covered all their sin. Selah. 3You have withdrawn all Your wrath,
You have turned away from Your burning anger. 4Restore us, O God of our salvation,
And cause Your indignation toward us to cease. 5Will You be angry with us forever?
Will You prolong Your anger to all generations? 6Will You not revive us and bring us to life again,
That Your people may rejoice in You? 7Show us Your lovingkindness, O LORD,
And grant us Your salvation. 8I will hear [with expectant hope] what God the LORD will say,
For He will speak peace to His people, to His godly ones—
But let them not turn again to folly. 9Surely His salvation is near to those who [reverently] fear Him [and obey Him with submissive wonder],
That glory [the manifest presence of God] may dwell in our land. 10Steadfast love and truth and faithfulness meet together;
Righteousness and peace kiss each other. 11Truth springs from the earth,
And righteousness looks down from heaven. 12Indeed, the LORD will give what is good,
And our land will yield its produce. 13Righteousness will go before Him
And will make His footsteps into a way [in which to walk].

Psalm 86
A Psalm Of Supplication And Trust.
A Prayer of David. 1Incline Your ear, O LORD, and answer me,
For I am distressed and needy [I long for Your help]. 2Protect my life (soul), for I am godly and faithful;
O You my God, save Your servant, who trusts in You [believing in You and relying on You, confidently committing everything to You]. 3Be gracious and merciful to me, O Lord,
For to You I cry out all the day long. 4Make Your servant rejoice,
For to You, O Lord, I lift up my soul [all that I am—in prayer]. 5For You, O Lord, are good, and ready to forgive [our sins, sending them away, completely letting them go forever and ever];
And abundant in lovingkindness and overflowing in mercy to all those who call upon You. 6Hear, O LORD, my prayer;
And listen attentively to the voice of my supplications (specific requests)! 7In the day of my trouble I will call upon You,
For You will answer me. 8There is no one like You among the gods, O Lord,
Nor are there any works [of wonder and majesty] like Yours. 9All nations whom You have made shall come and kneel down in worship before You, O Lord,
And they shall glorify Your name. 10For You are great and do wondrous works!
You alone are God. 11Teach me Your way, O LORD,
I will walk and live in Your truth;
Direct my heart to fear Your name [with awe-inspired reverence and submissive wonder]. 12I will give thanks and praise You, O Lord my God, with all my heart;
And will glorify Your name forevermore. 13For great is Your lovingkindness and graciousness toward me;
And You have rescued my life from the depths of Sheol [from death]. 14O God, arrogant and insolent men have risen up against me;
A band of violent men have sought my life,
And they have not set You before them. 15But You, O Lord, are a God [who protects and is] merciful and gracious,
Slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness and truth. 16Turn to me, and be gracious to me;
Grant Your strength [Your might and the power to resist temptation] to Your servant,
And save the son of Your handmaid. 17Show me a sign of [Your] goodwill,
That those who hate me may see it and be ashamed,
Because You, O LORD, helped and comforted me.

Psalm 87
The Privileges Of Citizenship In Zion.
A Psalm of the sons of Korah. A Song. 1His foundation is on the holy mountain. 2The LORD loves the gates of Zion
More than all the dwellings of Jacob (Israel). 3Glorious things are spoken of you,
O city of God [Jerusalem]. Selah. 4“I will mention Rahab (Egypt) and Babylon among those who know Me—
Behold, Philistia and Tyre with Ethiopia (Cush)—
‘This one was born there.’” 5But of Zion it will be said, “This one and that one were born in her,”
And the Most High Himself will establish her. 6The LORD will count, when He registers the peoples,
“This one was born there.” Selah. 7The singers as well as the players of flutes will say,
“All my springs and sources of joy are in you [Jerusalem, city of God].”

Psalm 88
A Petition To Be Saved From Death.
A Song. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. To the Chief Musician; set to chant mournfully. A didactic or reflective poem of Heman the Ezrahite. 1O LORD, the God of my salvation,
I have cried out [for help] by day and in the night before You. 2Let my prayer come before You and enter into Your presence;
Incline Your ear to my cry! 3For my soul is full of troubles,
And my life draws near the grave (Sheol, the place of the dead). 4I am counted among those who go down to the pit (grave);
I am like a man who has no strength [a mere shadow], 5Cast away [from the living] and abandoned among the dead,
Like the slain who lie in a [nameless] grave,
Whom You no longer remember,
And they are cut off from Your hand. 6You have laid me in the lowest pit,
In dark places, in the depths. 7Your wrath has rested heavily upon me,
And You have afflicted me with all Your waves. Selah. 8You have put my friends far from me;
You have made me an object of loathing to them.
I am shut up and I cannot go out. 9My eye grows dim with sorrow.
O LORD, I have called on You every day;
I have spread out my hands to You [in prayer]. 10Will You perform wonders for the dead?
Shall the departed spirits arise and praise You? Selah. 11Will Your lovingkindness be declared in the grave
Or Your faithfulness in Abaddon (the underworld)? 12Will Your wonders be known in the darkness?
And Your righteousness in the land of forgetfulness [where the dead forget and are forgotten]? 13But I have cried out to You, O LORD, for help;
And in the morning my prayer will come to You. 14O LORD, why do You reject me?
Why do You hide Your face from me? 15I was afflicted and close to death from my youth on;
I suffer Your terrors; I am overcome. 16Your fierce wrath has swept over me;
Your terrors have destroyed me. 17They have surrounded me like flood waters all day long;
They have completely encompassed me. 18Lover and friend You have placed far from me;
My familiar friends are in darkness.

Psalm 89
The LORD’S Covenant With David, And Israel’s Afflictions.
A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem, of Ethan the Ezrahite. 1I will sing of the goodness and lovingkindness of the LORD forever;
With my mouth I will make known Your faithfulness from generation to generation. 2For I have said, “Goodness and lovingkindness will be built up forever;
In the heavens [unchangeable and majestic] You will establish Your faithfulness.” 3[God has said] “I have made a covenant with My chosen one;
I have sworn to David My servant, 4I will establish your seed forever
And I will build up your throne for all generations.” Selah. 5The heavens (angels) praise Your wonders, O LORD,
Your faithfulness also in the assembly of the holy ones. 6For who in the heavens can be compared to the LORD?
Who among the divine beings is like the LORD, 7A God greatly feared and reverently worshiped in the council of the holy [angelic] ones,
And awesome above all those who are around Him? 😯 LORD God of hosts, who is like You, O mighty LORD?
Your faithfulness surrounds You [as an intrinsic, unchangeable part of Your very being]. 9You rule the swelling of the sea;
When its waves rise, You still them. 10You have crushed Rahab (Egypt) like one who is slain;
You have scattered Your enemies with Your mighty arm. 11The heavens are Yours, the earth also is Yours;
The world and all that is in it, You have founded and established them. 12The north and the south, You have created them;
Mount Tabor and Mount Hermon shout for joy at Your name. 13You have a strong arm;
Mighty is Your hand, Your right hand is exalted. 14Righteousness and justice are the foundation of Your throne;
Lovingkindness and truth go before You. 15Blessed and happy are the people who know the joyful sound [of the trumpet’s blast]!
They walk, O LORD, in the light and favor of Your countenance! 16In Your name they rejoice all the day,
And in Your righteousness they are exalted. 17For You are the glory of their strength [their proud adornment],
And by Your favor our horn is exalted. 18For our shield belongs to the LORD,
And our king to the Holy One of Israel. 19Once You spoke in a vision to Your godly ones,
And said, “I have given help to one who is mighty [giving him the power to be a champion for Israel];
I have exalted one chosen from the people. 20“I have found David My servant;
With My holy oil I have anointed him, 21With whom My hand shall be established and steadfast;
My arm also shall strengthen him. 22“The enemy will not outwit him,
Nor will the wicked man afflict or humiliate him. 23“I will crush his adversaries before him,
And strike those who hate him. 24“My faithfulness and My steadfast lovingkindness shall be with him,
And in My name shall his horn be exalted [great power and prosperity shall be conferred upon him]. 25“I will also set his hand on the [Mediterranean] sea,
And his right hand on the rivers [the tributaries of the Euphrates]. 26“He will cry to Me, ‘You are my Father,
My God, and the rock of my salvation.’ 27“I will also make him My firstborn (preeminent),
The highest of the kings of the earth. 28“My lovingkindness I will keep for him forevermore,
And My covenant will be confirmed to him. 29“His descendants I will establish forever,
And his throne [will endure] as the days of heaven. 30“If his children turn away from My law
And do not walk in My ordinances, 31If they break My statutes
And do not keep My commandments, 32Then I will punish their transgression with the rod [of discipline],
And [correct] their wickedness with stripes. 33“Nevertheless, I will not break off My lovingkindness from him,
Nor allow My faithfulness to fail. 34“My covenant I will not violate,
Nor will I alter the utterance of My lips. 35“Once [for all] I have sworn by My holiness, [My vow which cannot be violated];
I will not lie to David. 36“His descendants shall endure forever
And his throne [will continue] as the sun before Me. 37“It shall be established forever like the moon,
And the witness in the heavens is ever faithful.” Selah. 38But [in apparent contradiction of all this] You [the faithful LORD] have cast off and rejected;
You have been full of wrath against Your anointed. 39You have spurned and repudiated the covenant with Your servant;
You have profaned his crown [by casting it] in the dust. 40You have broken down all his [city] walls;
You have brought his strongholds to ruin. 41All who pass along the road rob him;
He has become the scorn of his neighbors. 42You have exalted the right hand of his foes;
You have made all his enemies rejoice. 43Also, You have turned back the edge of his sword
And have not made him [strong enough] to stand in battle. 44You have put an end to his splendor
And have hurled his throne to the ground. 45You have shortened the days of his youth;
You have covered him with shame. Selah. 46How long, O LORD?
Will You hide Yourself forever?
Will Your wrath burn like fire? 47Remember how fleeting my lifetime is;
For what vanity, [for what emptiness, for what futility, for what wisp of smoke] You have created all the sons of men! 48What man can live and not see death?
Can he rescue his soul from the [powerful] hand of Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead)? Selah. 49O Lord, where are Your former lovingkindnesses [so abundant in the days of David and Solomon],
Which You swore to David in Your faithfulness? 50Remember, O Lord, the reproach of Your servants [scorned, insulted, and disgraced];
How I bear in my heart the reproach of all the many peoples, 51With which Your enemies have taunted, O LORD,
With which they have mocked the footsteps of Your anointed. 52Blessed be the LORD forevermore!
Amen and Amen.

Psalm 90
God’s Eternity And Man’s Transitoriness.
A Prayer of Moses the man of God. 1Lord, You have been our dwelling place [our refuge, our sanctuary, our stability] in all generations. 2Before the mountains were born
Or before You had given birth to the earth and the world,
Even from everlasting to everlasting, You are [the eternal] God. 3You turn man back to dust,
And say, “Return [to the earth], O children of [mortal] men!” 4For a thousand years in Your sight
Are like yesterday when it is past,
Or as a watch in the night. 5You have swept them away like a flood, they fall asleep [forgotten as soon as they are gone];
In the morning they are like grass which grows anew— 6In the morning it flourishes and springs up;
In the evening it wilts and withers away. 7For we have been consumed by Your anger
And by Your wrath we have been terrified. 8You have placed our wickedness before you,
Our secret sins [which we tried to conceal, You have placed] in the [revealing] light of Your presence. 9For all our days pass away in Your wrath;
We have finished our years like a whispered sigh. 10The days of our life are seventy years—
Or even, if because of strength, eighty years;
Yet their pride [in additional years] is only labor and sorrow,
For it is soon gone and we fly away. 11Who understands the power of Your anger? [Who connects this brevity of life among us with Your judgment of sin?]
And Your wrath, [who connects it] with the [reverent] fear that is due You? 12So teach us to number our days,
That we may cultivate and bring to You a heart of wisdom. 13Turn, O LORD [from Your fierce anger]; how long will it be?
Be compassionate toward Your servants—revoke Your sentence. 14O satisfy us with Your lovingkindness in the morning [now, before we grow older],
That we may rejoice and be glad all our days. 15Make us glad in proportion to the days You have afflicted us,
And the years we have suffered evil. 16Let Your work [the signs of Your power] be revealed to Your servants
And Your [glorious] majesty to their children. 17And let the [gracious] favor of the Lord our God be on us;
Confirm for us the work of our hands—
Yes, confirm the work of our hands.

Psalm 91
Security Of The One Who Trusts In The LORD.
1He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High
Will remain secure and rest in the shadow of the Almighty [whose power no enemy can withstand]. 2I will say of the LORD, “He is my refuge and my fortress,
My God, in whom I trust [with great confidence, and on whom I rely]!” 3For He will save you from the trap of the fowler,
And from the deadly pestilence. 4He will cover you and completely protect you with His pinions,
And under His wings you will find refuge;
His faithfulness is a shield and a wall. 5You will not be afraid of the terror of night,
Nor of the arrow that flies by day, 6Nor of the pestilence that stalks in darkness,
Nor of the destruction (sudden death) that lays waste at noon. 7A thousand may fall at your side
And ten thousand at your right hand,
But danger will not come near you. 8You will only [be a spectator as you] look on with your eyes
And witness the [divine] repayment of the wicked [as you watch safely from the shelter of the Most High]. 9Because you have made the LORD, [who is] my refuge,
Even the Most High, your dwelling place, 10No evil will befall you,
Nor will any plague come near your tent. 11For He will command His angels in regard to you,
To protect and defend and guard you in all your ways [of obedience and service]. 12They will lift you up in their hands,
So that you do not [even] strike your foot against a stone. 13You will tread upon the lion and cobra;
The young lion and the serpent you will trample underfoot. 14“Because he set his love on Me, therefore I will save him;
I will set him [securely] on high, because he knows My name [he confidently trusts and relies on Me, knowing I will never abandon him, no, never]. 15“He will call upon Me, and I will answer him;
I will be with him in trouble;
I will rescue him and honor him. 16“With a long life I will satisfy him
And I will let him see My salvation.”

Psalm 92
Praise For The LORD’S Goodness.
A Psalm. A Song for the Sabbath day. 1It is a good and delightful thing to give thanks to the LORD,
To sing praises to Your name, O Most High, 2To declare Your lovingkindness in the morning
And Your faithfulness by night, 3With an instrument of ten strings and with the harp,
With a solemn sound on the lyre. 4For You, O LORD, have made me glad by Your works;
At the works of Your hands I joyfully sing. 5How great are Your works, O LORD!
Your thoughts are very deep [beyond man’s understanding]. 6A senseless man [in his crude and uncultivated state] knows nothing,
Nor does a [self-righteous] fool understand this: 7That though the wicked sprout up like grass
And all evildoers flourish,
They will be destroyed forever. 8But You, LORD, are on high forever. 9For behold, Your enemies, O LORD,
For behold, Your enemies will perish;
All who do evil will be scattered. 10But my horn [my emblem of strength and power] You have exalted like that of a wild ox;
I am anointed with fresh oil [for Your service]. 11My eye has looked on my foes;
My ears hear of the evildoers who rise up against me. 12The righteous will flourish like the date palm [long-lived, upright and useful];
They will grow like a cedar in Lebanon [majestic and stable]. 13Planted in the house of the LORD,
They will flourish in the courts of our God. 14[Growing in grace] they will still thrive and bear fruit and prosper in old age;
They will flourish and be vital and fresh [rich in trust and love and contentment]; 15[They are living memorials] to declare that the LORD is upright and faithful [to His promises];
He is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in Him.

Psalm 93
The Majesty Of The LORD.
1The LORD reigns, He is clothed with majesty and splendor;
The LORD has clothed and encircled Himself with strength;
the world is firmly established, it cannot be moved. 2Your throne is established from of old;
You are from everlasting. 3The floods have lifted up, O LORD,
The floods have lifted up their voice;
The floods lift up their pounding waves. 4More than the sounds of many waters,
More than the mighty breakers of the sea,
The LORD on high is mighty. 5Your precepts are fully confirmed and completely reliable;
Holiness adorns Your house,
O LORD, forever.

Psalm 94
The LORD Implored To Avenge His People.
1O LORD God, You to whom vengeance belongs,
O God, You to whom vengeance belongs, shine forth [in judgment]! 2Rise up, O Judge of the earth;
Give to the proud a fitting compensation. 3O LORD, how long will the wicked,
How long will the wicked rejoice in triumph? 4They pour out words, speaking arrogant things;
All who do evil boast proudly. 5They crush Your people, O LORD,
And afflict and abuse Your heritage. 6They kill the widow and the alien
And murder the fatherless. 7Yet they say, “The LORD does not see,
Nor does the God of Jacob (Israel) notice it.” 8Consider thoughtfully, you senseless (stupid ones) among the people;
And you [dull-minded] fools, when will you become wise and understand? 9He who made the ear, does He not hear?
He who formed the eye, does He not see? 10He who instructs the nations,
Does He not rebuke and punish,
He who teaches man knowledge? 11The LORD knows the thoughts of man,
That they are a mere breath (vain, empty, futile). 12Blessed [with wisdom and prosperity] is the man whom You discipline and instruct, O LORD,
And whom You teach from Your law, 13That You may grant him [power to calm himself and find] peace in the days of adversity,
Until the pit is dug for the wicked and ungodly. 14For the LORD will not abandon His people,
Nor will He abandon His inheritance. 15For judgment will again be righteous,
And all the upright in heart will follow it. 16Who will stand up for me against the evildoers?
Who will take a stand for me against those who do wickedness? 17If the LORD had not been my help,
I would soon have dwelt in [the land of] silence. 18If I say, “My foot has slipped,”
Your compassion and lovingkindness, O LORD, will hold me up. 19When my anxious thoughts multiply within me,
Your comforts delight me. 20Can a throne of destruction be allied with You,
One which frames and devises mischief by decree [under the sacred name of law]? 21They band themselves together against the life of the righteous
And condemn the innocent to death. 22But the LORD has become my high tower and defense,
And my God the rock of my refuge. 23He has turned back their own wickedness upon them
And will destroy them by means of their own evil;
The LORD our God will wipe them out.

Psalm 95
Praise To The LORD, And Warning Against Unbelief.
1O come, let us sing joyfully to the LORD;
Let us shout joyfully to the rock of our salvation. 2Let us come before His presence with a song of thanksgiving;
Let us shout joyfully to Him with songs. 3For the LORD is a great God
And a great King above all gods, 4In whose hand are the depths of the earth;
The peaks of the mountains are His also. 5The sea is His, for He made it [by His command];
And His hands formed the dry land. 6O come, let us worship and bow down,
Let us kneel before the LORD our Maker [in reverent praise and prayer]. 7For He is our God
And we are the people of His pasture and the sheep of His hand.
Today, if you will hear His voice, 8Do not harden your hearts and become spiritually dull as at Meribah [the place of strife],
And as at Massah [the place of testing] in the wilderness, 9“When your fathers tested Me,
They tried Me, even though they had seen My work [of miracles]. 10“For forty years I was grieved and disgusted with that generation,
And I said, ‘They are a people who err in their heart,
And they do not acknowledge or regard My ways.’ 11“Therefore I swore [an oath] in My wrath,
‘They absolutely shall not enter My rest [the land of promise].’”

Psalm 96
A Call To Worship The LORD The Righteous Judge.
1O sing to the LORD a new song;
Sing to the LORD, all the earth! 2Sing to the LORD, bless His name;
Proclaim good news of His salvation from day to day. 3Declare His glory among the nations,
His marvelous works and wonderful deeds among all the peoples. 4For great is the LORD and greatly to be praised;
He is to be feared above all gods. 5For all the gods of the peoples are [worthless, lifeless] idols,
But the LORD made the heavens. 6Splendor and majesty are before Him;
Strength and beauty are in His sanctuary. 7Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the peoples,
Ascribe to the LORD glory and strength. 8Ascribe to the LORD the glory of His name;
Bring an offering and come into His courts. 9Worship the LORD in the splendor of holiness;
Tremble [in submissive wonder] before Him, all the earth. 10Say among the nations, “The LORD reigns;
Indeed, the world is firmly and securely established, it shall not be moved;
He will judge and rule the people with fairness.” 11Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice;
Let the sea roar, and all the things it contains; 12Let the field be exultant, and all that is in it.
Then all the trees of the forest will sing for joy 13Before the LORD, for He is coming,
For He is coming to judge the earth.
He will judge the world with righteousness
And the peoples in His faithfulness.

Psalm 97
The LORD’S Power And Dominion.
1The LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice;
Let the many islands and coastlands be glad. 2Clouds and thick darkness surround Him [as at Sinai];
Righteousness and justice are the foundation of His throne. 3Fire goes before Him
And burns up His adversaries on all sides. 4His lightnings have illuminated the world;
The earth has seen and trembled. 5The mountains melted like wax at the presence of the LORD,
At the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. 6The heavens declare His righteousness,
And all the peoples see His glory and brilliance. 7Let all those be [deeply] ashamed who serve carved images,
Who boast in idols.
Worship Him, all you gods! 8Zion heard this and was glad,
And the daughters (cities) of Judah rejoiced [in relief]
Because of Your judgments, O LORD. 9For You are the LORD Most High over all the earth;
You are exalted far above all gods. 10You who love the LORD, hate evil;
He protects the souls of His godly ones (believers),
He rescues them from the hand of the wicked. 11Light is sown [like seed] for the righteous and illuminates their path,
And [irrepressible] joy [is spread] for the upright in heart [who delight in His favor and protection]. 12Rejoice in the LORD, you righteous ones [those whose moral and spiritual integrity places them in right standing with God],
And praise and give thanks at the remembrance of His holy name.

Psalm 98
A Call To Praise The LORD For His Righteousness.
A Psalm. 1O sing to the LORD a new song,
For He has done marvelous and wonderful things;
His right hand and His holy arm have gained the victory for Him. 2The LORD has made known His salvation;
He has [openly] revealed His righteousness in the sight of the nations. 3He has [graciously] remembered His lovingkindness and His faithfulness to the house of Israel;
All the ends of the earth have witnessed the salvation of our God. 4Shout joyfully to the LORD, all the earth;
Shout [in jubilation] and sing for joy and sing praises. 5Sing praises to the LORD with the lyre,
With the lyre and the sound of melody. 6With trumpets and the sound of the horn
Shout with joy before the King, the LORD. 7Let the sea thunder and roar, and all the things it contains,
The world and those who dwell in it. 8Let the rivers clap their hands;
Let the mountains sing together for joy and delight 9Before the LORD, for He is coming to judge the earth;
He will judge the world with righteousness
And the peoples with fairness.

Psalm 99
Praise To The LORD For His Fidelity To Israel.
1The LORD reigns, let the peoples tremble [with submissive wonder]!
He sits enthroned above the cherubim, let the earth shake! 2The LORD is great in Zion,
And He is exalted and magnified above all the peoples. 3Let them [reverently] praise Your great and awesome name;
Holy is He. 4The strength of the King loves justice and righteous judgment;
You have established fairness;
You have executed justice and righteousness in Jacob (Israel). 5Exalt the LORD our God
And worship at His footstool;
Holy is He. 6Moses and Aaron were among His priests,
And Samuel was among those who called on His name;
They called upon the LORD and He answered them. 7He spoke to them in the pillar of cloud;
They kept His testimonies
And the statutes that He gave them. 8You answered them, O LORD our God;
You were a forgiving God to them,
And yet an avenger of their evil practices. 9Exalt the LORD our God
And worship at His holy hill [Zion, the temple mount],
For the LORD our God is holy.

Psalm 100
All Men Exhorted To Praise God.
A Psalm of Thanksgiving. 1Shout joyfully to the LORD, all the earth. 2Serve the LORD with gladness and delight;
Come before His presence with joyful singing. 3Know and fully recognize with gratitude that the LORD Himself is God;
It is He who has made us, not we ourselves [and we are His].
We are His people and the sheep of His pasture. 4Enter His gates with a song of thanksgiving
And His courts with praise.
Be thankful to Him, bless and praise His name. 5For the LORD is good;
His mercy and lovingkindness are everlasting,
His faithfulness [endures] to all generations.

Psalm 101
The Psalmist’s Profession Of Uprightness.
A Psalm of David. 1I will sing of [steadfast] lovingkindness and justice;
To You, O LORD, I will sing praises. 2I will behave wisely and follow the way of integrity.
When will You come to me?
I will walk in my house in integrity and with a blameless heart. 3I will set no worthless or wicked thing before my eyes.
I hate the practice of those who fall away [from the right path];
It will not grasp hold of me. 4A perverse heart shall depart from me;
I will not tolerate evil. 5Whoever secretly slanders his neighbor, him I will silence;
The one who has a haughty look and a proud (arrogant) heart I will not tolerate. 6My eyes will be on the faithful (honorable) of the land, that they may dwell with me;
He who walks blamelessly is the one who will minister to and serve me. 7He who practices deceit will not dwell in my house;
He who tells lies and half-truths will not continue [to remain] in my presence. 8Morning after morning I will destroy all the wicked in the land,
That I may cut off from the city of the LORD all those who do evil.

Psalm 102
Prayer Of An Afflicted Man For Mercy On Himself And On Zion.
A Prayer of the afflicted; when he is overwhelmed and pours out his complaint to God. 1Hear my prayer, O LORD,
And let my cry for help come to You! 2Do not hide Your face from me in the day of my distress!
Incline Your ear to me;
In the day when I call, answer me quickly. 3For my days have vanished in smoke,
And my bones have been scorched like a hearth. 4My heart has been struck like grass and withered,
Indeed, [absorbed by my heartache] I forget to eat my food. 5Because of the sound of my groaning [in suffering and trouble]
My bones cling to my flesh. 6I am like a [mournful] vulture of the wilderness;
I am like a [desolate] owl of the wasteland. 7I am sleepless and lie awake [mourning],
I have become like a lonely bird on a housetop. 8My enemies taunt me all day long;
Those who ridicule me use my name as a curse. 9For I have eaten ashes like bread,
And have mingled my drink with tears 10Because of Your indignation and Your wrath,
For You have lifted me up and thrown me away. 11My days are like an evening shadow that lengthens and vanishes [with the sun];
And as for me, I wither away like grass. 12But You, O LORD, are enthroned forever [ruling eternally as sovereign];
And [the fame and glory of] Your name [endures] to all generations. 13You will arise and have compassion on Zion,
For it is time to be gracious and show favor to her;
Yes, the appointed time [the moment designated] has come. 14For Your servants find [melancholy] pleasure in the stones [of her ruins]
And feel pity for her dust. 15So the nations will fear the name of the LORD,
And all the kings of the earth [will recognize] Your glory. 16For the LORD has built up Zion;
He has appeared in His glory and brilliance; 17He has regarded the prayer of the destitute,
And has not despised their prayer. 18Let this be recorded for the generation to come,
That a people yet to be created will praise the LORD. 19For He looked down from His holy height [of His sanctuary],
From heaven the LORD gazed on the earth, 20To hear the sighing of the prisoner,
To set free those who were doomed to death, 21So that people may declare the name of the LORD in Zion
And His praise in Jerusalem, 22When the peoples are gathered together,
And the kingdoms, to serve the LORD. 23He has exhausted my strength [humbling me with sorrow] in the way;
He has shortened my days. 24I said, “O my God, do not take me away in the midst of my days;
Your years are [eternal] throughout all generations. 25“At the beginning You founded the earth;
The heavens are the work of Your hands. 26“Even they will perish, but You endure;
Yes, all of them will wear out like a garment.
Like clothing You will change them and they shall be changed. 27“But You remain the same,
And Your years will never end. 28“The children of Your servants will continue,
And their descendants will be established before You.”

Psalm 103
Praise For The LORD’S Mercies.
A Psalm of David. 1Bless and affectionately praise the LORD, O my soul,
And all that is [deep] within me, bless His holy name. 2Bless and affectionately praise the LORD, O my soul,
And do not forget any of His benefits; 3Who forgives all your sins,
Who heals all your diseases; 4Who redeems your life from the pit,
Who crowns you [lavishly] with lovingkindness and tender mercy; 5Who satisfies your years with good things,
So that your youth is renewed like the [soaring] eagle. 6The LORD executes righteousness
And justice for all the oppressed. 7He made known His ways [of righteousness and justice] to Moses,
His acts to the children of Israel. 8The LORD is merciful and gracious,
Slow to anger and abounding in compassion and lovingkindness. 9He will not always strive with us,
Nor will He keep His anger forever. 10He has not dealt with us according to our sins [as we deserve],
Nor rewarded us [with punishment] according to our wickedness. 11For as the heavens are high above the earth,
So great is His lovingkindness toward those who fear and worship Him [with awe-filled respect and deepest reverence]. 12As far as the east is from the west,
So far has He removed our transgressions from us. 13Just as a father loves his children,
So the LORD loves those who fear and worship Him [with awe-filled respect and deepest reverence]. 14For He knows our [mortal] frame;
He remembers that we are [merely] dust. 15As for man, his days are like grass;
Like a flower of the field, so he flourishes. 16For the wind passes over it and it is no more,
And its place knows it no longer. 17But the lovingkindness of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting on those who [reverently] fear Him,
And His righteousness to children’s children, 18To those who honor and keep His covenant,
And remember to do His commandments [imprinting His word on their hearts]. 19The LORD has established His throne in the heavens,
And His sovereignty rules over all [the universe]. 20Bless the LORD, you His angels,
You mighty ones who do His commandments,
Obeying the voice of His word! 21Bless the LORD, all you His hosts,
You who serve Him and do His will. 22Bless the LORD, all you works of His, in all places of His dominion;
Bless and affectionately praise the LORD, O my soul!

Psalm 104
The LORD’S Care Over All His Works.
1Bless and affectionately praise the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD my God, You are very great;
You are clothed with splendor and majesty, 2[You are the One] who covers Yourself with light as with a garment,
Who stretches out the heavens like a tent curtain, 3Who lays the beams of His upper chambers in the waters [above the firmament],
Who makes the clouds His chariot,
Who walks on the wings of the wind, 4Who makes winds His messengers,
Flames of fire His ministers. 5He established the earth on its foundations,
So that it will not be moved forever and ever. 6You covered it with the deep as with a garment;
The waters were standing above the mountains. 7At Your rebuke they fled;
At the sound of Your thunder they hurried away. 8The mountains rose, the valleys sank down
To the place which You established for them. 9You set a boundary [for the waters] that they may not cross over,
So that they will not return to cover the earth. 10You send springs into the valleys;
Their waters flow among the mountains. 11They give drink to every beast of the field;
The wild donkeys quench their thirst there. 12Beside them the birds of the heavens have their nests;
They lift up their voices and sing among the branches. 13He waters the mountains from His upper chambers;
The earth is satisfied with the fruit of His works. 14He causes grass to grow for the cattle,
And all that the earth produces for cultivation by man,
So that he may bring food from the earth— 15And wine which makes the heart of man glad,
So that he may make his face glisten with oil,
And bread to sustain and strengthen man’s heart. 16The trees of the LORD drink their fill,
The cedars of Lebanon which He has planted, 17Where the birds make their nests;
As for the stork, the fir trees are her house. 18The high mountains are for the wild goats;
The rocks are a refuge for the shephanim. 19He made the moon for the seasons;
The sun knows the [exact] place of its setting. 20You [O LORD] make darkness and it becomes night,
In which prowls about every wild beast of the forest. 21The young lions roar after their prey
And seek their food from God. 22When the sun arises, they withdraw
And lie down in their dens. 23Man goes out to his work
And remains at his labor until evening. 24O LORD, how many and varied are Your works!
In wisdom You have made them all;
The earth is full of Your riches and Your creatures. 25There is the sea, great and broad,
In which are swarms without number,
Creatures both small and great. 26There the ships [of the sea] sail,
And Leviathan [the sea monster], which You have formed to play there. 27They all wait for You
To give them their food in its appointed season. 28You give it to them, they gather it up;
You open Your hand, they are filled and satisfied with good [things]. 29You hide Your face, they are dismayed;
You take away their breath, they die
And return to their dust. 30You send out Your Spirit, they are created;
You renew the face of the ground. 31May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
May the LORD rejoice and be glad in His works— 32He looks at the earth, and it trembles;
He touches the mountains, and they smoke. 33I will sing to the LORD as long as I live;
I will sing praise to my God while I have my being. 34May my meditation be sweet and pleasing to Him;
As for me, I will rejoice and be glad in the LORD. 35Let sinners be consumed from the earth,
And let the wicked be no more.
Bless and affectionately praise the LORD, O my soul.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 105
The LORD’S Wonderful Works In Behalf Of Israel.
1O give thanks to the LORD, call upon His name;
Make known His deeds among the people. 2Sing to Him, sing praises to Him;
Speak of all His wonderful acts and devoutly praise them. 3Glory in His holy name;
Let the hearts of those who seek and require the LORD [as their most essential need] rejoice. 4Seek and deeply long for the LORD and His strength [His power, His might];
Seek and deeply long for His face and His presence continually. 5Remember [with awe and gratitude] the wonderful things which He has done,
His amazing deeds and the judgments uttered by His mouth [on His enemies, as in Egypt], 6O you offspring of Abraham, His servant,
O you sons of Jacob, His chosen ones! 7He is the LORD our God;
His judgments are in all the earth. 8He has remembered His covenant forever,
The word which He commanded and established to a thousand generations, 9The covenant which He made with Abraham,
And His sworn oath to Isaac, 10Which He confirmed to Jacob as a statute,
To Israel as an everlasting covenant, 11Saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaan
As the measured portion of your inheritance.” 12When there were only a few men in number,
Very few [in fact], and strangers in it; 13And they wandered from one nation to another,
From one kingdom to another people, 14He allowed no man to oppress them;
He rebuked kings for their sakes, saying, 15“Do not touch My anointed ones,
And do My prophets no harm.” 16And He called for a famine upon the land [of Egypt];
He cut off every source of bread. 17He sent a man before them,
Joseph, who was sold as a slave. 18His feet they hurt with shackles;
He was put in chains of iron, 19Until the time that his word [of prophecy regarding his brothers] came true,
The word of the LORD tested and refined him. 20The king sent and released him,
The ruler of the peoples [of Egypt], and set him free. 21He made Joseph lord of his house
And ruler of all his possessions, 22To imprison his princes at his will,
That he might teach his elders wisdom. 23Israel also came into Egypt;
Thus Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham. 24There the LORD greatly increased [the number of] His people,
And made them more powerful than their enemies. 25He turned the heart [of the Egyptians] to hate His people,
To deal craftily with His servants. 26He sent Moses His servant,
And Aaron, whom He had chosen. 27They exhibited His wondrous signs among them,
Great miracles in the land of Ham (Egypt). 28He sent [thick, oppressive] darkness and made the land dark;
And Moses and Aaron did not rebel against His words. 29He turned Egypt’s waters into blood
And caused their fish to die. 30Their land swarmed with frogs,
Even in the chambers of their kings. 31He spoke, and there came swarms of flies
And gnats in all their territory. 32He gave them hail for rain,
With flaming fire in their land. 33He struck their vines also and their fig trees,
And shattered the [ice-laden] trees of their territory. 34He spoke, and the [migratory] locusts came,
And the young locusts, even without number, 35And ate up all the vegetation in their land,
And devoured the fruit of their ground. 36He also struck down all the firstborn in their land,
The first fruits and chief substance of all their strength. 37He brought the sons of Israel out [of Egypt] with silver and gold,
And among their tribes there was not one who stumbled. 38Egypt was glad when they departed,
For the dread and fear of them had fallen on the Egyptians. 39The LORD spread a cloud as a covering [by day],
And a fire to illumine the night. 40The Israelites asked, and He brought quail,
And satisfied them with the bread of heaven. 41He opened the rock and water flowed out;
It ran in the dry places like a river. 42For He remembered His holy word
To Abraham His servant; 43He brought out His people with joy,
And His chosen ones with a joyful shout, 44He gave them the lands of the nations [of Canaan],
So that they would possess the fruits of those peoples’ labor, 45So that they might observe His precepts
And keep His laws [obediently accepting and honoring and valuing them].
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 106
Israel’s Rebelliousness And The LORD’S Deliverances.
1Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)
Oh give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
For His mercy and lovingkindness endure forever! 2Who can put into words the mighty deeds of the LORD?
Or who can proclaim all His praise [that is due Him]? 3Blessed are those who observe justice [by honoring God’s precepts],
Who practice righteousness at all times. 4Remember me, O LORD, when You favor Your people.
Visit me with Your salvation [when You rescue them], 5That I may see the prosperity of Your chosen ones,
That I may rejoice in the gladness of Your nation,
That I may glory with Your inheritance. 6We have sinned like our fathers;
We have committed iniquity, we have behaved wickedly. 7Our fathers in Egypt did not understand nor appreciate Your miracles;
They did not remember the abundance of Your mercies nor imprint Your lovingkindnesses on their hearts,
But they were rebellious at the sea, at the Red Sea. 8Nevertheless He saved them for His name’s sake,
That He might make His [supreme] power known. 9He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up;
And He led them through the depths as through a pasture. 10So He saved them from the hand of the one that hated them,
And redeemed them from the hand of the [Egyptian] enemy. 11And the waters covered their adversaries;
Not one of them was left. 12Then Israel believed in [the validity of] His words;
They sang His praise. 13But they quickly forgot His works;
They did not [patiently] wait for His counsel and purpose [to be revealed regarding them], 14But lusted intensely in the wilderness
And tempted God [with their insistent desires] in the desert. 15So He gave them their request,
But sent a wasting disease among them. 16They envied Moses in the camp,
And Aaron [the high priest], the holy one of the LORD, 17Therefore the earth opened and swallowed Dathan,
And engulfed the company of Abiram. 18And a fire broke out in their company;
The flame consumed the wicked. 19They made a calf in Horeb (Sinai)
And worshiped a cast image. 20Thus they exchanged [the true God who was] their glory
For the image of an ox that eats grass. 21They forgot God their Savior,
Who had done such great things in Egypt, 22Wonders in the land of Ham,
Awesome things at the Red Sea. 23Therefore He said He would destroy them,
[And He would have done so] had not Moses, His chosen one, stepped into the gap before Him,
To turn away His wrath from destroying them. 24Then they despised the pleasant land [of Canaan];
They did not believe in His word nor rely on it, 25But they sulked and complained in their tents;
They did not listen to the voice of the LORD. 26Therefore He lifted up His hand [swearing] to them,
That He would cause them to fall in the wilderness, 27And that He would cast out their descendants among the nations
And scatter them in the lands [of the earth]. 28They joined themselves also to [the idol] Baal of Peor,
And ate sacrifices offered to the dead. 29Thus they provoked Him to anger with their practices,
And a plague broke out among them. 30Then Phinehas [the priest] stood up and interceded,
And so the plague was halted. 31And that was credited to him for righteousness,
To all generations forever. 32They provoked Him to anger at the waters of Meribah,
So that it went hard with Moses on their account; 33Because they were rebellious against His Spirit,
Moses spoke recklessly with his lips. 34They did not destroy the [pagan] peoples [in Canaan],
As the LORD commanded them, 35But they mingled with the [idolatrous] nations
And learned their ways, 36And served their idols,
Which became a [dreadful] snare to them. 37They even sacrificed their sons and their daughters to demons 38And shed innocent blood,
Even the blood of their sons and of their daughters,
Whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan;
And the land was polluted with their blood. 39In this way they became unclean in their practices;
They played the prostitute in their own deeds [by giving their worship, which belongs to God alone, to other “gods”]. 40Therefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against His people
And He detested His own inheritance. 41He gave them into the hands of the nations,
And those who hated them ruled over them. 42Their enemies also oppressed them,
And they were subdued under the [powerful] hand of their enemies. 43Many times He rescued them;
But they were rebellious in their counsel,
And sank down in their wickedness. 44Nevertheless He looked [sympathetically] at their distress
When He heard their cry; 45And He remembered His covenant for their sake,
And relented [rescinding their sentence] according to the greatness of His lovingkindness [when they cried out to Him], 46He also made them objects of compassion
Among those who had carried them away captive. 47Save us, O LORD our God,
And gather us from among the nations,
That we may give thanks to Your holy name
And glory in praising You. 48Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
From everlasting even to everlasting.
And let all the people say, “Amen.”
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 107
The LORD Rescues People From Many Troubles.
1O give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
For His compassion and lovingkindness endure forever! 2Let the redeemed of the LORD say so,
Whom He has redeemed from the hand of the adversary, 3And gathered them from the lands,
From the east and from the west,
From the north and from the south. 4They wandered in the wilderness in a [solitary] desert region;
And did not find a way to an inhabited city. 5Hungry and thirsty,
They fainted. 6Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble,
And He rescued them from their distresses. 7He led them by the straight way,
To an inhabited city [where they could establish their homes]. 8Let them give thanks to the LORD for His lovingkindness,
And for His wonderful acts to the children of men! 9For He satisfies the parched throat,
And fills the hungry appetite with what is good. 10Some dwelt in darkness and in the deep (deathly) darkness,
Prisoners [bound] in misery and chains, 11Because they had rebelled against the precepts of God
And spurned the counsel of the Most High. 12Therefore He humbled their heart with hard labor;
They stumbled and there was no one to help. 13Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble,
And He saved them from their distresses. 14He brought them out of darkness and the deep (deathly) darkness
And broke their bonds apart. 15Let them give thanks to the LORD for His lovingkindness,
And for His wonderful acts to the children of men! 16For He has shattered the gates of bronze
And cut the bars of iron apart. 17Fools, because of their rebellious way,
And because of their sins, were afflicted. 18They detested all kinds of food,
And they drew near to the gates of death. 19Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble,
And He saved them from their distresses. 20He sent His word and healed them,
And rescued them from their destruction. 21Let them give thanks to the LORD for His lovingkindness,
And for His wonderful acts to the children of men! 22And let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving,
And speak of His deeds with shouts of joy! 23Those who go down to the sea in ships,
Who do business on great waters; 24They have seen the works of the LORD,
And His wonders in the deep. 25For He spoke and raised up a stormy wind,
Which lifted up the waves of the sea. 26They went up toward the heavens [on the crest of the wave], they went down again to the depths [of the watery trough];
Their courage melted away in their misery. 27They staggered and trembled like a drunken man,
And were at their wits’ end [all their wisdom was useless]. 28Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble,
And He brought them out of their distresses. 29He hushed the storm to a gentle whisper,
So that the waves of the sea were still. 30Then they were glad because of the calm,
And He guided them to their desired haven (harbor). 31Let them give thanks to the LORD for His lovingkindness,
And for His wonderful acts to the children of men! 32Let them exalt Him also in the congregation of the people,
And praise Him at the seat of the elders. 33He turns rivers into a wilderness,
And springs of water into a thirsty ground; 34A productive land into a [barren] salt waste,
Because of the wickedness of those who dwell in it. 35He turns a wilderness into a pool of water
And a dry land into springs of water; 36And there He has the hungry dwell,
So that they may establish an inhabited city, 37And sow fields and plant vineyards,
And produce an abundant harvest. 38Also He blesses them so that they multiply greatly,
And He does not let [the number of] their cattle decrease. 39When they are diminished and bowed down (humbled)
Through oppression, misery, and sorrow, 40He pours contempt on princes
And makes them wander in a pathless wasteland. 41Yet He sets the needy securely on high, away from affliction,
And makes their families like a flock. 42The upright see it and rejoice;
But all unrighteousness shuts its mouth. 43Who is wise? Let him observe and heed these things;
And [thoughtfully] consider the lovingkindness of the LORD.

Psalm 108
Praise And Supplication To God For Victory.
A Song. A Psalm of David. 1O God, my heart is steadfast [with confident faith];
I will sing, I will sing praises, even with my soul. 2Awake, harp and lyre;
I will awaken the dawn! 3I will praise and give thanks to You, O LORD, among the people;
And I will sing praises to You among the nations. 4For Your lovingkindness is great and higher than the heavens;
Your truth reaches to the skies. 5Be exalted [in majesty], O God, above the heavens,
And Your glory above all the earth. 6That Your beloved [ones] may be rescued,
Save with Your right hand, and answer me! 7God has spoken in His holiness:
“I will rejoice, I will portion out Shechem [as I divide Canaan among My people],
And measure out the Valley of Succoth. 8“Gilead is Mine, Manasseh is Mine;
Ephraim also is the helmet of My head [My stronghold, My defense];
Judah is My scepter. 9“Moab is My washbowl;
Over Edom I will throw My shoe [to show Edom is Mine];
Over Philistia I will shout [in triumph].” 10Who will bring me into the fortified city [of Petra]?
Who will lead me to Edom? 11Have You not rejected us, O God?
And will You not go out, O God, with our armies? 12Give us help against the adversary,
For deliverance by man is in vain [a worthless hope]. 13With God we will do valiantly,
For it is He who will trample down our enemies.

Psalm 109
Vengeance Invoked Upon Adversaries.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1O God of my praise!
Do not keep silent, 2For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me;
They have spoken against me with a lying tongue. 3They have also surrounded me with words of hatred,
And have fought against me without a cause. 4In return for my love, they attack me,
But I am in prayer. 5They have repaid me evil for good,
And hatred for my love. 6Appoint a wicked man against him,
And let an attacker stand at his right hand [to kill him]. 7When he enters into dispute, let wickedness come about.
Let his prayer [for help] result [only] in sin. 8Let his days be few;
And let another take his office. 9Let his children be fatherless
And his wife a widow. 10Let his children wander and beg;
Let them seek their food and be driven far from their ruined homes. 11Let the creditor seize all that he has,
And let strangers plunder the product of his labor. 12Let there be no one to extend kindness to him,
Nor let anyone be gracious to his fatherless children. 13Let his descendants be cut off,
And in the following generation let their name be blotted out. 14Let the wickedness of his fathers be remembered by the LORD;
And do not let the sin of his mother be blotted out. 15Let them be before the LORD continually,
That He may cut off their memory from the earth; 16Because the man did not remember to show kindness,
But persecuted the suffering and needy man,
And the brokenhearted, to put them to death. 17He also loved cursing, and it came [back] to him;
He did not delight in blessing, so it was far from him. 18He clothed himself with cursing as with his garment,
And it seeped into his inner self like water
And like [anointing] oil into his bones. 19Let it be to him as a robe with which he covers himself,
And as a sash with which he is constantly bound. 20Let this be the reward of my attackers from the LORD,
And of those who speak evil against my life. 21But You, O GOD, the Lord, show kindness to me, for Your name’s sake;
Because Your lovingkindness (faithfulness, compassion) is good, O rescue me; 22For I am suffering and needy,
And my heart is wounded within me. 23I am vanishing like a shadow when it lengthens and fades;
I am shaken off like the locust. 24My knees are unsteady from fasting;
And my flesh is gaunt and without fatness. 25I also have become a reproach and an object of taunting to others;
When they see me, they shake their heads [in derision]. 26Help me, O LORD my God;
Save me according to Your lovingkindness— 27And let them know that this is Your hand;
You, LORD, have done it. 28Let them curse, but You bless.
When adversaries arise, let them be ashamed,
But let Your servant rejoice. 29Let my attackers be clothed with dishonor,
And let them cover themselves with their own shame as with a robe. 30I will give great praise and thanks to the LORD with my mouth;
And in the midst of many I will praise Him. 31For He will stand at the right hand of the needy,
To save him from those who judge his soul.

Psalm 110
The LORD Gives Dominion To The King.
A Psalm of David. 1The LORD (Father) says to my Lord (the Messiah, His Son),
“Sit at My right hand
Until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet [subjugating them into complete submission].” 2The LORD will send the scepter of Your strength from Zion, saying,
“Rule in the midst of Your enemies.” 3Your people will offer themselves willingly [to participate in Your battle] in the day of Your power;
In the splendor of holiness, from the womb of the dawn,
Your young men are to You as the dew. 4The LORD has sworn [an oath] and will not change His mind:
“You are a priest forever
According to the order of Melchizedek.” 5The LORD is at Your right hand,
He will crush kings in the day of His wrath. 6He will execute judgment [in overwhelming punishment] among the nations;
He will fill them with corpses,
He will crush the chief men over a broad country. 7He will drink from the brook by the wayside;
Therefore He will lift up His head [triumphantly].

Psalm 111
The LORD Praised For His Goodness.
1Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)
I will give thanks to the LORD with all my heart,
In the company of the upright and in the congregation. 2Great are the works of the LORD,
Studied by all those who delight in them. 3Splendid and majestic is His work,
And His righteousness endures forever. 4He has made His wonderful acts to be remembered;
The LORD is gracious and merciful and full of loving compassion. 5He has given food to those who fear Him [with awe-inspired reverence];
He will remember His covenant forever. 6He has declared and made known to His people the power of His works,
In giving them the heritage of the nations. 7The works of His hands are truth and [absolute] justice;
All His precepts are sure (established, reliable, trustworthy). 8They are upheld forever and ever;
They are done in [absolute] truth and uprightness. 9He has sent redemption to His people;
He has ordained His covenant forever;
Holy and awesome is His name—[inspiring reverence and godly fear]. 10The [reverent] fear of the LORD is the beginning (the prerequisite, the absolute essential, the alphabet) of wisdom;
A good understanding and a teachable heart are possessed by all those who do the will of the LORD;
His praise endures forever.

Psalm 112
Prosperity Of The One Who Fears The LORD.
1Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)
Blessed [fortunate, prosperous, and favored by God] is the man who fears the LORD [with awe-inspired reverence and worships Him with obedience],
Who delights greatly in His commandments. 2His descendants will be mighty on earth;
The generation of the upright will be blessed. 3Wealth and riches are in his house,
And his righteousness endures forever. 4Light arises in the darkness for the upright;
He is gracious and compassionate and righteous (upright—in right standing with God). 5It is well with the man who is gracious and lends;
He conducts his affairs with justice. 6He will never be shaken;
The righteous will be remembered forever. 7He will not fear bad news;
His heart is steadfast, trusting [confidently relying on and believing] in the LORD. 8His heart is upheld, he will not fear
While he looks [with satisfaction] on his adversaries. 9He has given freely to the poor;
His righteousness endures forever;
His horn will be exalted in honor. 10The wicked will see it and be angered,
He will gnash his teeth and melt away [in despair and death];
The desire of the wicked will perish and come to nothing.

Psalm 113
The LORD Exalts The Humble.
1Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)
Praise, O servants of the LORD,
Praise the name of the LORD. 2Blessed be the name of the LORD
From this time forth and forever. 3From the rising of the sun to its setting
The name of the LORD is to be praised [with awe-inspired reverence]. 4The LORD is high above all nations,
And His glory above the heavens. 5Who is like the LORD our God,
Who is enthroned on high, 6Who humbles Himself to regard
The heavens and the earth? 7He raises the poor out of the dust
And lifts the needy from the ash heap, 8That He may seat them with princes,
With the princes of His people. 9He makes the barren woman live in the house
As a joyful mother of children.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 114
God’s Rescue Of Israel From Egypt.
1When Israel came out of Egypt,
The house of Jacob from a people of strange language, 2Judah became His sanctuary,
And Israel His dominion. 3The [Red] Sea looked and fled;
The Jordan turned back. 4The mountains leaped like rams,
The [little] hills, like lambs. 5What ails you, O sea, that you flee?
O Jordan, that you turn back? 6O mountains, that you leap like rams,
O [little] hills, like lambs? 7Tremble, O earth, at the presence of the Lord,
At the presence of the God of Jacob (Israel), 8Who turned the rock into a pool of water,
The flint into a fountain of water.

Psalm 115
Pagan Idols Contrasted With The LORD.
1Not to us, O LORD, not to us,
But to Your name give glory
Because of Your lovingkindness, because of Your truth and faithfulness. 2Why should the nations say,
“Where, now, is their God?” 3But our God is in heaven;
He does whatever He pleases. 4The idols [of the nations] are silver and gold,
The work of man’s hands. 5They have mouths, but they cannot speak;
They have eyes, but they cannot see; 6They have ears, but they cannot hear;
They have noses, but they cannot smell; 7They have hands, but they cannot feel;
They have feet, but they cannot walk;
Nor can they make a sound with their throats. 8Those who make them will become like them,
Everyone who trusts in them. 9O Israel, trust and take refuge in the LORD! [Be confident in Him, cling to Him, rely on His word!]
He is their help and their shield. 10O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD;
He is their help and their shield. 11You who [reverently] fear the LORD, trust in LORD;
He is their help and their shield. 12The LORD has been mindful of us; He will bless,
He will bless the house of Israel;
He will bless the house of Aaron. 13He will bless those who fear and worship the LORD [with awe-inspired reverence and submissive wonder],
Both the small and the great. 14May the LORD give you [great] increase,
You and your children. 15May you be blessed of the LORD,
Who made heaven and earth. 16The heavens are the heavens of the LORD,
But the earth He has given to the children of men. 17The dead do not praise the LORD,
Nor do any who go down into silence; 18But as for us, we will bless and affectionately and gratefully praise the LORD
From this time forth and forever.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 116
Thanksgiving For Rescue From Death.
1I love the LORD, because He hears [and continues to hear]
My voice and my supplications (my pleas, my cries, my specific needs). 2Because He has inclined His ear to me,
Therefore I will call on Him as long as I live. 3The cords and sorrows of death encompassed me,
And the terrors of Sheol came upon me;
I found distress and sorrow. 4Then I called on the name of the LORD:
“O LORD, please save my life!” 5Gracious is the LORD, and [consistently] righteous;
Yes, our God is compassionate. 6The LORD protects the simple (childlike);
I was brought low [humbled and discouraged], and He saved me. 7Return to your rest, O my soul,
For the LORD has dealt bountifully with you. 8For You have rescued my life from death,
My eyes from tears,
And my feet from stumbling and falling. 9I will walk [in submissive wonder] before the LORD
In the land of the living. 10I believed [and clung to my God] when I said,
“I am greatly afflicted.” 11I said in my alarm,
“All men are liars.” 12What will I give to the LORD [in return]
For all His benefits toward me?
[How can I repay Him for His precious blessings?] 13I will lift up the cup of salvation
And call on the name of the LORD. 14I will pay my vows to the LORD,
Yes, in the presence of all His people. 15Precious [and of great consequence] in the sight of the LORD
Is the death of His godly ones [so He watches over them]. 16O LORD, truly I am Your servant;
I am Your servant, the son of Your handmaid;
You have unfastened my chains. 17I will offer to You the sacrifice of thanksgiving,
And will call on the name of the LORD. 18I will pay my vows to the LORD,
Yes, in the presence of all His people, 19In the courts of the LORD’S house (temple)—
In the midst of you, O Jerusalem.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 117
A Psalm Of Praise.
1O praise the LORD, all you nations!
Praise Him, all you people! 2For His lovingkindness prevails over us [and we triumph and overcome through Him],
And the truth of the LORD endures forever.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 118
Thanksgiving For The LORD’S Saving Goodness.
1O give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
For His lovingkindness endures forever. 2Oh let Israel say,
“His lovingkindness endures forever.” 3Oh let the house of Aaron say,
“His lovingkindness endures forever.” 4Oh let those who [reverently] fear the LORD, say,
“His lovingkindness endures forever.” 5Out of my distress I called on the LORD;
The LORD answered me and set me free. 6The LORD is on my side; I will not fear.
What can [mere] man do to me? 7The LORD is on my side, He is among those who help me;
Therefore I will look [in triumph] on those who hate me. 8It is better to take refuge in the LORD
Than to trust in man. 9It is better to take refuge in the LORD
Than to trust in princes. 10All nations encompassed me;
In the name of the LORD I will surely cut them off. 11They encompassed me, yes, they surrounded me [on every side];
In the name of the LORD I will cut them off. 12They swarmed around me like bees;
They flare up and are extinguished like a fire of thorns;
In the name of the LORD I will surely cut them off. 13You [my enemy] pushed me violently so that I was falling,
But the LORD helped me. 14The LORD is my strength and song,
And He has become my salvation. 15The sound of joyful shouting and salvation is in the tents of the righteous:
The right hand of the LORD does valiantly. 16The right hand of the LORD is exalted;
The right hand of the LORD does valiantly. 17I will not die, but live,
And declare the works and recount the illustrious acts of the LORD. 18The LORD has disciplined me severely,
But He has not given me over to death. 19Open to me the [temple] gates of righteousness;
I shall enter through them, I shall give thanks to the LORD. 20This is the gate of the LORD;
The righteous will enter through it. 21I will give thanks to You, for You have heard and answered me;
And You have become my salvation [my Rescuer, my Savior]. 22The stone which the builders rejected
Has become the chief corner stone. 23This is from the LORD and is His doing;
It is marvelous in our eyes. 24This [day in which God has saved me] is the day which the LORD has made;
Let us rejoice and be glad in it. 25O LORD, save now, we beseech You;
O LORD, we beseech You, send now prosperity and give us success! 26Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the LORD;
We have blessed you from the house of the LORD [you who come into His sanctuary under His guardianship]. 27The LORD is God, and He has given us light [illuminating us with His grace and freedom and joy].
Bind the festival sacrifices with cords to the horns of the altar. 28You are my God, and I give thanks to You;
[You are] my God, I extol You. 29O give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
For His lovingkindness endures forever.

Psalm 119
Meditations And Prayers Relating To The Law Of God.
Aleph. 1How blessed and favored by God are those whose way is blameless [those with personal integrity, the upright, the guileless],
Who walk in the law [and who are guided by the precepts and revealed will] of the LORD. 2Blessed and favored by God are those who keep His testimonies,
And who [consistently] seek Him and long for Him with all their heart. 3They do no unrighteousness;
They walk in His ways. 4You have ordained Your precepts,
That we should follow them with [careful] diligence. 5Oh, that my ways may be established
To observe and keep Your statutes [obediently accepting and honoring them]! 6Then I will not be ashamed
When I look [with respect] to all Your commandments [as my guide]. 7I will give thanks to You with an upright heart,
When I learn [through discipline] Your righteous judgments [for my transgressions]. 8I shall keep Your statutes;
Do not utterly abandon me [when I fail]. Beth. 9How can a young man keep his way pure?
By keeping watch [on himself] according to Your word [conforming his life to Your precepts]. 10With all my heart I have sought You, [inquiring of You and longing for You];
Do not let me wander from Your commandments [neither through ignorance nor by willful disobedience]. 11Your word I have treasured and stored in my heart,
That I may not sin against You. 12Blessed and reverently praised are You, O LORD;
Teach me Your statutes. 13With my lips I have told of
All the ordinances of Your mouth. 14I have rejoiced in the way of Your testimonies,
As much as in all riches. 15I will meditate on Your precepts
And [thoughtfully] regard Your ways [the path of life established by Your precepts]. 16I will delight in Your statutes;
I will not forget Your word. Gimel. 17Deal bountifully with Your servant,
That I may live and keep Your word [treasuring it and being guided by it day by day]. 18Open my eyes [to spiritual truth] so that I may behold
Wonderful things from Your law. 19I am a stranger on the earth;
Do not hide Your commandments from me. 20My soul is crushed with longing
For Your ordinances at all times. 21You rebuke the presumptuous and arrogant, the cursed ones,
Who wander from Your commandments. 22Take reproach and contempt away from me,
For I observe Your testimonies. 23Even though princes sit and talk to one another against me,
Your servant meditates on Your statutes. 24Your testimonies also are my delight
And my counselors. Daleth. 25My earthly life clings to the dust;
Revive and refresh me according to Your word. 26I have told of my ways, and You have answered me;
Teach me Your statutes. 27Make me understand the way of Your precepts,
So that I will meditate (focus my thoughts) on Your wonderful works. 28My soul dissolves because of grief;
Renew and strengthen me according to [the promises of] Your word. 29Remove from me the way of falsehood and unfaithfulness,
And graciously grant me Your law. 30I have chosen the faithful way;
I have placed Your ordinances before me. 31I cling tightly to Your testimonies;
O LORD, do not put me to shame! 32I will run the way of Your commandments [with purpose],
For You will give me a heart that is willing. He. 33Teach me, O LORD, the way of Your statutes,
And I will [steadfastly] observe it to the end. 34Give me understanding [a teachable heart and the ability to learn], that I may keep Your law;
And observe it with all my heart. 35Make me walk in the path of Your commandments,
For I delight in it. 36Incline my heart to Your testimonies
And not to dishonest gain and envy. 37Turn my eyes away from vanity [all those worldly, meaningless things that distract—let Your priorities be mine],
And restore me [with renewed energy] in Your ways. 38Establish Your word and confirm Your promise to Your servant,
As that which produces [awe-inspired] reverence for You. 39Turn away my reproach which I dread,
For Your ordinances are good. 40I long for Your precepts;
Renew me through Your righteousness. Vav. 41May Your lovingkindness also come to me, O LORD,
Your salvation according to Your promise; 42So I will have an answer for the one who taunts me,
For I trust [completely] in Your word [and its reliability]. 43And do not take the word of truth utterly out of my mouth,
For I wait for Your ordinances. 44I will keep Your law continually,
Forever and ever [writing Your precepts on my heart]. 45And I will walk at liberty,
For I seek and deeply long for Your precepts. 46I will also speak of Your testimonies before kings
And shall not be ashamed. 47For I shall delight in Your commandments,
Which I love. 48And I shall lift up my hands to Your commandments,
Which I love;
And I will meditate on Your statutes. Zayin. 49Remember [always] the word and promise to Your servant,
In which You have made me hope. 50This is my comfort in my affliction,
That Your word has revived me and given me life. 51The arrogant utterly ridicule me,
Yet I do not turn away from Your law. 52I have remembered [carefully] Your ancient ordinances, O LORD,
And I have taken comfort. 53Burning indignation has seized me because of the wicked,
Who reject Your law. 54Your statutes are my songs
In the house of my pilgrimage. 55O LORD, I remember Your name in the night,
And keep Your law. 56This has become mine [as the gift of Your grace],
That I observe Your precepts [accepting them with loving obedience]. Heth. 57The LORD is my portion;
I have promised to keep Your words. 58I sought Your favor with all my heart;
Be merciful and gracious to me according to Your promise. 59I considered my ways
And turned my feet to [follow and obey] Your testimonies. 60I hurried and did not delay
To keep Your commandments. 61The cords of the wicked have encircled and ensnared me,
But I have not forgotten Your law. 62At midnight I will rise to give thanks to You
Because of Your righteous ordinances. 63I am a companion of all who [reverently] fear You,
And of those who keep and honor Your precepts. 64The earth, O LORD, is full of Your lovingkindness and goodness;
Teach me Your statutes. Teth. 65You have dealt well with Your servant,
O LORD, according to Your promise. 66Teach me good judgment (discernment) and knowledge,
For I have believed and trusted and relied on Your commandments. 67Before I was afflicted I went astray,
But now I keep and honor Your word [with loving obedience]. 68You are good and do good;
Teach me Your statutes. 69The arrogant have forged a lie against me,
But I will keep Your precepts with all my heart. 70Their heart is insensitive like fat [their minds are dull and brutal],
But I delight in Your law. 71It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
That I may learn Your statutes. 72The law from Your mouth is better to me
Than thousands of gold and silver pieces. Yodh. 73Your hands have made me and established me;
Give me understanding and a teachable heart, that I may learn Your commandments. 74May those who [reverently] fear You see me and be glad,
Because I wait for Your word. 75I know, O LORD, that Your judgments are fair,
And that in faithfulness You have disciplined me. 76O may Your lovingkindness and graciousness comfort me,
According to Your word (promise) to Your servant. 77Let Your compassion come to me that I may live,
For Your law is my delight. 78Let the arrogant be ashamed and humiliated, for they sabotage me with a lie;
But I will meditate on Your precepts. 79May those who fear You [with submissive wonder] turn to me,
Even those who have known Your testimonies. 80May my heart be blameless in Your statutes,
So that I will not be ashamed. Kaph. 81My soul languishes and grows weak for Your salvation;
I wait for Your word. 82My eyes fail [with longing, watching] for [the fulfillment of] Your promise,
Saying, “When will You comfort me?” 83For I have become like a wineskin [blackened and shriveled] in the smoke [in which it hangs],
Yet I do not forget Your statutes. 84How many are the days of Your servant [which he must endure]?
When will You execute judgment on those who persecute me? 85The arrogant (godless) have dug pits for me,
Men who do not conform to Your law. 86All Your commandments are faithful and trustworthy.
They have persecuted me with a lie; help me [LORD]! 87They had almost destroyed me on earth,
But as for me, I did not turn away from Your precepts. 88According to Your steadfast love refresh me and give me life,
So that I may keep and obey the testimony of Your mouth. Lamedh. 89Forever, O LORD,
Your word is settled in heaven [standing firm and unchangeable]. 90Your faithfulness continues from generation to generation;
You have established the earth, and it stands [securely]. 91They continue this day according to Your ordinances,
For all things [all parts of the universe] are Your servants. 92If Your law had not been my delight,
Then I would have perished in my time of trouble. 93I will never forget Your precepts,
For by them You have revived me and given me life. 94I am Yours, save me [as Your own];
For I have [diligently] sought Your precepts and required them [as my greatest need]. 95The wicked wait for me to destroy me,
But I will consider Your testimonies. 96I have seen that all [human] perfection has its limits [no matter how grand and perfect and noble];
Your commandment is exceedingly broad and extends without limits [into eternity]. Mem. 97Oh, how I love Your law!
It is my meditation all the day. 98Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies,
For Your words are always with me. 99I have better understanding and deeper insight than all my teachers [because of Your word],
For Your testimonies are my meditation. 100I understand more than the aged [who have not observed Your precepts],
Because I have observed and kept Your precepts. 101I have restrained my feet from every evil way,
That I may keep Your word. 102I have not turned aside from Your ordinances,
For You Yourself have taught me. 103How sweet are Your words to my taste,
Sweeter than honey to my mouth! 104From Your precepts I get understanding;
Therefore I hate every false way. Nun. 105Your word is a lamp to my feet
And a light to my path. 106I have sworn [an oath] and have confirmed it,
That I will keep Your righteous ordinances. 107I am greatly afflicted;
Renew and revive me [giving me life], O LORD, according to Your word. 108Accept and take pleasure in the freewill offerings of my mouth, O LORD,
And teach me Your ordinances. 109My life is continually in my hand,
Yet I do not forget Your law. 110The wicked have laid a snare for me,
Yet I do not wander from Your precepts. 111I have taken Your testimonies as a heritage forever,
For they are the joy of my heart. 112I have inclined my heart to perform Your statutes
Forever, even to the end. Samekh. 113I hate those who are double-minded,
But I love and treasure Your law. 114You are my hiding place and my shield;
I wait for Your word. 115Leave me, you evildoers,
That I may keep the commandments of my God [honoring and obeying them]. 116Uphold me according to Your word [of promise], so that I may live;
And do not let me be ashamed of my hope [in Your great goodness]. 117Uphold me that I may be safe,
That I may have regard for Your statutes continually. 118You have turned Your back on all those who wander from Your statutes,
For their deceitfulness is useless. 119You have removed all the wicked of the earth like dross [for they have no value];
Therefore I love Your testimonies. 120My flesh trembles in [reverent] fear of You,
And I am afraid and in awe of Your judgments. Ayin. 121I have done justice and righteousness;
Do not leave me to those who oppress me. 122Be the guarantee for Your servant for good [as Judah was the guarantee for Benjamin];
Do not let the arrogant oppress me. 123My eyes fail [with longing, watching] for [the fulfillment of] Your salvation,
And for [the fulfillment of] Your righteous word. 124Deal with Your servant according to Your [gracious] lovingkindness,
And teach me Your statutes. 125I am Your servant; give me understanding [the ability to learn and a teachable heart]
That I may know Your testimonies. 126It is time for the LORD to act;
They have broken Your law. 127Therefore I love Your commandments more than gold,
Yes, more than refined gold. 128Therefore I esteem as right all Your precepts concerning everything;
I hate every false way. Pe. 129Your testimonies are wonderful;
Therefore my soul keeps them. 130The unfolding of Your [glorious] words give light;
Their unfolding gives understanding to the simple (childlike). 131I opened my mouth and panted [with anticipation],
Because I longed for Your commandments. 132Turn to me and be gracious to me and show me favor,
As is Your way to those who love Your name. 133Establish my footsteps in [the way of] Your word;
Do not let any human weakness have power over me [causing me to be separated from You]. 134Redeem me from the oppression of man;
That I may keep Your precepts. 135Make Your face shine [with pleasure] upon Your servant,
And teach me Your statutes. 136My eyes weep streams of water
Because people do not keep Your law. Tsadhe. 137Righteous are You, O LORD,
And upright are Your judgments. 138You have commanded Your testimonies in righteousness
And in great faithfulness. 139My zeal has [completely] consumed me,
Because my enemies have forgotten Your words. 140Your word is very pure (refined);
Therefore Your servant loves it. 141I am small and despised,
But I do not forget Your precepts. 142Your righteousness is an everlasting righteousness,
And Your law is truth. 143Trouble and anguish have found me,
Yet Your commandments are my delight and my joy. 144Your righteous testimonies are everlasting;
Give me understanding [the ability to learn and a teachable heart] that I may live. Qoph. 145I cried with all my heart; answer me, O LORD!
I will observe Your statutes. 146I cried to You; save me
And I will keep Your testimonies. 147I rise before dawn and cry [in prayer] for help;
I wait for Your word. 148My eyes anticipate the night watches and I awake before the call of the watchman,
That I may meditate on Your word. 149Hear my voice according to Your [steadfast] lovingkindness;
O LORD, renew and refresh me according to Your ordinances. 150Those who follow after wickedness approach;
They are far from Your law. 151You are near, O LORD,
And all Your commandments are truth. 152Of old I have known from Your testimonies
That You have founded them forever. Resh. 153Look upon my agony and rescue me,
For I do not forget Your law. 154Plead my cause and redeem me;
Revive me and give me life according to [the promise of] Your word. 155Salvation is far from the wicked,
For they do not seek Your statutes. 156Great are Your tender mercies and steadfast love, O LORD;
Revive me and give me life according to Your ordinances. 157Many are my persecutors and my adversaries,
Yet I do not turn away from Your testimonies. 158I see the treacherous and loathe them,
Because they do not respect Your law. 159Consider how I love Your precepts;
Revive me and give me life, O LORD, according to Your lovingkindness. 160The sum of Your word is truth [the full meaning of all Your precepts],
And every one of Your righteous ordinances endures forever. Shin. 161Princes persecute me without cause,
But my heart stands in [reverent] awe of Your words [so I can expect You to help me]. 162I rejoice at Your word,
As one who finds great treasure. 163I hate and detest falsehood,
But I love Your law. 164Seven times a day I praise You,
Because of Your righteous ordinances. 165Those who love Your law have great peace;
Nothing makes them stumble. 166I hope and wait [with complete confidence] for Your salvation, O LORD,
And I do Your commandments. 167My soul keeps Your testimonies [hearing and accepting and obeying them];
I love them greatly. 168I keep Your precepts and Your testimonies,
For all my ways are [fully known] before You. Tav. 169Let my [mournful] cry come before You, O LORD;
Give me understanding [the ability to learn and a teachable heart] according to Your word [of promise]. 170Let my supplication come before You;
Deliver me according to Your word. 171Let my lips speak praise [with thanksgiving],
For You teach me Your statutes. 172Let my tongue sing [praise for the fulfillment] of Your word,
For all Your commandments are righteous. 173Let Your hand be ready to help me,
For I have chosen Your precepts. 174I long for Your salvation, O LORD,
And Your law is my delight. 175Let my soul live that it may praise You,
And let Your ordinances help me. 176I have gone astray like a lost sheep;
Seek Your servant, for I do not forget Your commandments.

Psalm 120
Prayer For Breaking Away From The Treacherous.
A Song of Ascents. 1In my trouble I cried to the LORD,
And He answered me. 2Rescue my soul, O LORD, from lying lips,
And from a deceitful tongue. 3What shall be given to you, and what more shall be done to you,
You deceitful tongue?— 4Sharp arrows of the warrior,
With the burning coals of the broom tree. 5Woe to me, for I sojourn in Meshech,
and I live among the tents of Kedar [among hostile people]! 6Too long my soul has had its dwelling
With those who hate peace. 7I am for peace, but when I speak,
They are for war.

Psalm 121
The LORD The Keeper Of Israel.
A Song of Ascents. 1I will lift up my eyes to the hills [of Jerusalem]—
From where shall my help come? 2My help comes from the LORD,
Who made heaven and earth. 3He will not allow your foot to slip;
He who keeps you will not slumber. 4Behold, He who keeps Israel
Will neither slumber [briefly] nor sleep [soundly]. 5The LORD is your keeper;
The LORD is your shade on your right hand. 6The sun will not strike you by day,
Nor the moon by night. 7The LORD will protect you from all evil;
He will keep your life. 8The LORD will guard your going out and your coming in [everything that you do]
From this time forth and forever.

Psalm 122
Prayer For The Peace Of Jerusalem.
A Song of Ascents. Of David. 1I was glad when they said to me,
“Let us go to the house of the LORD.” 2Our feet are standing
Within your gates, O Jerusalem, 3Jerusalem, that is built
As a city that is firmly joined together; 4To which the [twelve] tribes go up, even the tribes of the LORD,
[As was decreed as] an ordinance for Israel,
To give thanks to the name of the LORD. 5For there the thrones of judgment were set,
The thrones of the house of David. 6Pray for the peace of Jerusalem:
“May they prosper who love you [holy city]. 7“May peace be within your walls
And prosperity within your palaces.” 8For the sake of my brothers and my friends,
I will now say, “May peace be within you.” 9For the sake of the house of the LORD our God [which is Jerusalem],
I will seek your (the city’s) good.

Psalm 123
Prayer For The LORD’S Help.
A Song of Ascents. 1Unto you I lift up my eyes,
O You who are enthroned in the heavens! 2Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master,
And as the eyes of a maid to the hand of her mistress,
So our eyes look to the LORD our God,
Until He is gracious and favorable toward us. 3Be gracious to us, O LORD, be gracious and favorable toward us,
For we are greatly filled with contempt. 4Our soul is greatly filled
With the scoffing of those who are at ease,
And with the contempt of the proud [who disregard God’s law].

Psalm 124
Praise For Rescue From Enemies.
A Song of Ascents. Of David. 1“If it had not been the LORD who was on our side,”
Let Israel now say, 2“If it had not been the LORD who was on our side
When men rose up against us, 3Then they would have [quickly] swallowed us alive,
When their wrath was kindled against us; 4Then the waters would have engulfed us,
The torrent would have swept over our soul; 5Then the raging waters would have swept over our soul.” 6Blessed be the LORD,
Who has not given us as prey to be torn by their teeth. 7We have escaped like a bird from the snare of the fowlers;
The trap is broken and we have escaped. 8Our help is in the name of the LORD,
Who made heaven and earth.

Psalm 125
The LORD Surrounds His People.
A Song of Ascents. 1Those who trust in and rely on the LORD [with confident expectation]
Are like Mount Zion, which cannot be moved but remains forever. 2As the mountains surround Jerusalem,
So the LORD surrounds His people
From this time forth and forever. 3For the scepter of wickedness shall not rest on the land of the righteous,
So that the righteous will not reach out their hands to do wrong. 4Do good, O LORD, to those who are good
And to those who are upright in their hearts. 5But as for those who turn aside to their crooked ways [in unresponsiveness to God],
The LORD will lead them away with those who do evil.
Peace be upon Israel.

Psalm 126
Thanksgiving For Return From Captivity.
A Song of Ascents. 1When the LORD brought back the captives to Zion (Jerusalem),
We were like those who dream [it seemed so unreal]. 2Then our mouth was filled with laughter
And our tongue with joyful shouting;
Then they said among the nations,
“The LORD has done great things for them.” 3The LORD has done great things for us;
We are glad! 4Restore our captivity, O LORD,
As the stream-beds in the South (the Negev) [are restored by torrents of rain]. 5They who sow in tears shall reap with joyful singing. 6He who goes back and forth weeping, carrying his bag of seed [for planting],
Will indeed come again with a shout of joy, bringing his sheaves with him.

Psalm 127
Prosperity Comes From The LORD.
A Song of Ascents. Of Solomon. 1Unless the LORD builds the house,
They labor in vain who build it;
Unless the LORD guards the city,
The watchman keeps awake in vain. 2It is vain for you to rise early,
To retire late,
To eat the bread of anxious labors—
For He gives [blessings] to His beloved even in his sleep. 3Behold, children are a heritage and gift from the LORD,
The fruit of the womb a reward. 4Like arrows in the hand of a warrior,
So are the children of one’s youth. 5How blessed [happy and fortunate] is the man whose quiver is filled with them;
They will not be ashamed
When they speak with their enemies [in gatherings] at the [city] gate.

Psalm 128
Blessedness Of The Fear Of The LORD.
A Song of Ascents. 1Blessed [happy and sheltered by God’s favor] is everyone who fears the LORD [and worships Him with obedience],
Who walks in His ways and lives according to His commandments. 2For you shall eat the fruit of [the labor of] your hands,
You will be happy and blessed and it will be well with you. 3Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine
Within the innermost part of your house;
Your children will be like olive plants
Around your table. 4Behold, for so shall the man be blessed and divinely favored
Who fears the LORD [and worships Him with obedience]. 5May the LORD bless you from Zion [His holy mountain],
And may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem all the days of your life; 6Indeed, may you see your [family perpetuated in your] children’s children.
Peace be upon Israel!

Psalm 129
Prayer For The Overthrow Of Zion’s Enemies.
A Song of Ascents. 1“Many times they have persecuted me (Israel) from my youth,”
Let Israel now say, 2“Many times they have persecuted me from my youth,
Yet they have not prevailed against me. 3“The [enemies, like] plowers plowed on my back;
They made their furrows [of suffering] long [in Israel].” 4The LORD is righteous;
He has cut in two the [thick] cords of the wicked [which enslaved the people of Israel]. 5May all who hate Zion
Be put to shame and turned backward [in defeat]. 6Let them be like the grass on the housetops,
Which withers before it grows up, 7With which the reaper does not fill his hand,
Nor the binder of sheaves his arms, 8Nor do those who pass by say,
“The blessing of the LORD be upon you;
We bless you in the name of the LORD.”

Psalm 130
Hope In The LORD’S Forgiving Love.
A Song of Ascents. 1Out of the depths [of distress] I have cried to You, O LORD. 2Lord, hear my voice!
Let Your ears be attentive
To the voice of my supplications. 3If You, LORD, should keep an account of our sins and treat us accordingly,
O Lord, who could stand [before you in judgment and claim innocence]? 4But there is forgiveness with You,
That You may be feared and worshiped [with submissive wonder]. 5I wait [patiently] for the LORD, my soul [expectantly] waits,
And in His word do I hope. 6My soul waits for the Lord
More than the watchmen for the morning;
More than the watchmen for the morning. 7O Israel, hope in the LORD;
For with the LORD there is lovingkindness,
And with Him is abundant redemption. 8And He will redeem Israel
From all his sins.

Psalm 131
Childlike Trust In The LORD.
A Song of Ascents. Of David. 1LORD, my heart is not proud, nor my eyes haughty;
Nor do I involve myself in great matters,
Or in things too difficult for me. 2Surely I have calmed and quieted my soul;
Like a weaned child [resting] with his mother,
My soul is like a weaned child within me [composed and freed from discontent]. 3O Israel, hope in the LORD
From this time forth and forever.

Psalm 132
Prayer For The LORD’S Blessing Upon The Sanctuary.
A Song of Ascents. 1O LORD, remember on David’s behalf
All his hardship and affliction; 2How he swore to the LORD
And vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob: 3“I absolutely will not enter my house,
Nor get into my bed— 4I certainly will not permit my eyes to sleep
Nor my eyelids to slumber, 5Until I find a place for the LORD,
A dwelling place for the Mighty One of Jacob (Israel).” 6Behold, we heard of it at Ephrathah;
We found it in the field of Jaar. 7Let us go into His tabernacle;
Let us worship at His footstool. 8Arise, O LORD, to Your resting place,
You and the ark [the symbol] of Your strength. 9Let Your priests be clothed with righteousness (right living),
And let Your godly ones shout for joy. 10For the sake of Your servant David,
Do not turn away the face of Your anointed. 11The LORD swore to David
A truth from which He will not turn back:
“One of your descendants I will set upon your throne. 12“If your children will keep My covenant
And My testimony which I will teach them,
Their children also shall sit upon your throne forever.” 13For the LORD has chosen Zion;
He has desired it for His dwelling place: 14“This is My resting place forever” [says the LORD];
“Here will I dwell, for I have desired it. 15“I will abundantly bless her provisions;
I will satisfy her poor with bread. 16“Her priests also I will clothe with salvation,
And her godly ones will shout aloud for joy. 17“There I will make the horn (strength) of David grow;
I have prepared a lamp for My anointed [fulfilling the promises]. 18“His enemies I will clothe with shame,
But upon himself shall his crown shine.”

Psalm 133
The Excellency Of Brotherly Unity.
A Song of Ascents. Of David. 1Behold, how good and how pleasant it is
For brothers to dwell together in unity! 2It is like the precious oil [of consecration] poured on the head,
Coming down on the beard,
Even the beard of Aaron,
Coming down upon the edge of his [priestly] robes [consecrating the whole body]. 3It is like the dew of [Mount] Hermon
Coming down on the hills of Zion;
For there the LORD has commanded the blessing: life forevermore.

Psalm 134
Greetings Of Night Watchers.
A Song of Ascents. 1Behold, bless and praise the LORD, all servants of the LORD (priests, Levites),
Who stand and serve by night in the house of the LORD. 2Lift up your hands to the sanctuary
And bless the LORD. 3May the LORD bless you from Zion,
He who made heaven and earth.

Psalm 135
Praise The LORD’S Wonderful Works. Vanity Of Idols.
1Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)
Praise the name of the LORD;
Praise Him, O servants of the LORD (priests, Levites), 2You who stand in the house of the LORD,
In the courts of the house of our God, 3Praise the LORD, for the LORD is good;
Sing praises to His name, for it is gracious and lovely. 4For the LORD has chosen [the descendants of] Jacob for Himself,
Israel for His own special treasure and possession. 5For I know that the LORD is great
And that our Lord is above all gods. 6Whatever the LORD pleases, He does,
In the heavens and on the earth, in the seas and all deeps— 7Who causes the clouds to rise from the ends of the earth;
Who makes lightning for the rain,
Who brings the wind from His storehouses; 8Who struck the firstborn of Egypt,
Both of man and animal; 9Who sent signs and wonders into your midst, O Egypt,
Upon Pharaoh and all his servants. 10Who struck many nations
And killed mighty kings, 11Sihon, king of the Amorites,
Og, king of Bashan,
And all the kingdoms of Canaan; 12And He gave their land as a heritage,
A heritage to Israel His people. 13Your name, O LORD, endures forever,
Your fame and remembrance, O LORD, [endures] throughout all generations. 14For the LORD will judge His people
And He will have compassion on His servants [revealing His mercy]. 15The idols of the nations are silver and gold,
The work of men’s hands. 16They have mouths, but they do not speak;
They have eyes, but they do not see; 17They have ears, but they do not hear,
Nor is there any breath in their mouths. 18Those who make idols are like them [absolutely worthless—spiritually blind, deaf, and powerless];
So is everyone who trusts in and relies on them. 19O house of Israel, bless and praise the LORD [with gratitude];
O house of Aaron, bless the LORD; 20O house of Levi, bless the LORD;
You who fear the LORD [and worship Him with obedience], bless the LORD [with grateful praise]! 21Blessed be the LORD from Zion,
Who dwells [with us] at Jerusalem.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 136
Thanks For The LORD’S Goodness To Israel.
1Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
For His lovingkindness (graciousness, mercy, compassion) endures forever. 2Give thanks to the God of gods,
For His lovingkindness endures forever. 3Give thanks to the Lord of lords,
For His lovingkindness endures forever. 4To Him who alone does great wonders,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 5To Him who made the heavens with skill,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 6To Him who stretched out the earth upon the waters,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 7To Him who made the great lights,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 8The sun to rule over the day,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 9The moon and stars to rule by night,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 10To Him who struck the firstborn of Egypt,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 11And brought Israel out from among them,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 12With a strong hand and with an outstretched arm,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 13To Him who divided the Red Sea into parts,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 14And made Israel pass through the midst of it,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 15But tossed Pharaoh and his army into the Red Sea,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 16To Him who led His people through the wilderness,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 17To Him who struck down great kings,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 18And killed mighty kings,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 19Sihon, king of the Amorites,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 20And Og, king of Bashan,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 21And gave their land as a heritage,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 22Even a heritage to Israel His servant,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 23Who [faithfully] remembered us in our lowly condition,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 24And has rescued us from our enemies,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 25Who gives food to all flesh,
For His lovingkindness endures forever; 26Give thanks to the God of heaven,
For His lovingkindness (graciousness, mercy, compassion) endures forever.

Psalm 137
An Experience Of The Captivity.
1By the rivers of Babylon,
There we [captives] sat down and wept,
When we remembered Zion [the city God imprinted on our hearts]. 2On the willow trees in the midst of Babylon
We hung our harps. 3For there they who took us captive demanded of us a song with words,
And our tormentors [who made a mockery of us demanded] amusement, saying,
“Sing us one of the songs of Zion.” 4How can we sing the LORD’S song
In a strange and foreign land? 5If I forget you, O Jerusalem,
Let my right hand forget [her skill with the harp]. 6Let my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth
If I do not remember you,
If I do not prefer Jerusalem
Above my chief joy. 7Remember, O LORD, against the sons of Edom,
The day of [the fall of] Jerusalem,
Who said “Down, down [with her]
To her very foundation.” 😯 daughter of Babylon, you devastator,
How blessed will be the one
Who repays you [with destruction] as you have repaid us. 9How blessed will be the one who seizes and dashes your little ones
Against the rock.

Psalm 138
Thanksgiving For The LORD’S Favor.
A Psalm of David. 1I will give You thanks with all my heart;
I sing praises to You before the [pagan] gods. 2I will bow down [in worship] toward Your holy temple
And give thanks to Your name for Your lovingkindness and Your truth;
For You have magnified Your word together with Your name. 3On the day I called, You answered me;
And You made me bold and confident with [renewed] strength in my life. 4All the kings of the land will give thanks and praise You, O LORD,
When they have heard of the promises of Your mouth [which were fulfilled]. 5Yes, they will sing of the ways of the LORD [joyfully celebrating His wonderful acts],
For great is the glory and majesty of the LORD. 6Though the LORD is exalted,
He regards the lowly [and invites them into His fellowship];
But the proud and haughty He knows from a distance. 7Though I walk in the midst of trouble, You will revive me;
You will stretch out Your hand against the wrath of my enemies,
And Your right hand will save me. 8The LORD will accomplish that which concerns me;
Your [unwavering] lovingkindness, O LORD, endures forever—
Do not abandon the works of Your own hands.

Psalm 139
God’s Omnipresence And Omniscience.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1O LORD, you have searched me [thoroughly] and have known me. 2You know when I sit down and when I rise up [my entire life, everything I do];
You understand my thought from afar. 3You scrutinize my path and my lying down,
And You are intimately acquainted with all my ways. 4Even before there is a word on my tongue [still unspoken],
Behold, O LORD, You know it all. 5You have enclosed me behind and before,
And [You have] placed Your hand upon me. 6Such [infinite] knowledge is too wonderful for me;
It is too high [above me], I cannot reach it. 7Where can I go from Your Spirit?
Or where can I flee from Your presence? 8If I ascend to heaven, You are there;
If I make my bed in Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead), behold, You are there. 9If I take the wings of the dawn,
If I dwell in the remotest part of the sea, 10Even there Your hand will lead me,
And Your right hand will take hold of me. 11If I say, “Surely the darkness will cover me,
And the night will be the only light around me,” 12Even the darkness is not dark to You and conceals nothing from You,
But the night shines as bright as the day;
Darkness and light are alike to You. 13For You formed my innermost parts;
You knit me [together] in my mother’s womb. 14I will give thanks and praise to You, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
Wonderful are Your works,
And my soul knows it very well. 15My frame was not hidden from You,
When I was being formed in secret,
And intricately and skillfully formed [as if embroidered with many colors] in the depths of the earth. 16Your eyes have seen my unformed substance;
And in Your book were all written
The days that were appointed for me,
When as yet there was not one of them [even taking shape]. 17How precious also are Your thoughts to me, O God!
How vast is the sum of them! 18If I could count them, they would outnumber the sand.
When I awake, I am still with You. 19O that You would kill the wicked, O God;
Go away from me, therefore, men of bloodshed. 20For they speak against You wickedly,
Your enemies take Your name in vain. 21Do I not hate those who hate You, O LORD?
And do I not loathe those who rise up against You? 22I hate them with perfect and utmost hatred;
They have become my enemies. 23Search me [thoroughly], O God, and know my heart;
Test me and know my anxious thoughts; 24And see if there is any wicked or hurtful way in me,
And lead me in the everlasting way.

Psalm 140
Prayer For Protection Against The Wicked.
To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. 1Rescue me, O LORD, from evil men;
Protect me from violent men. 2They devise evil things in their hearts;
They continually [gather together and] stir up wars. 3They sharpen their tongues like a serpent’s;
Poison of a viper is under their lips. Selah. 4Keep me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked;
Protect me from violent men
Who intend to trip up my steps. 5The proud have hidden a trap for me, and cords;
They have spread a net by the wayside;
They have set traps for me. Selah. 6I said to the LORD, “You are my God;
Listen to the voice of my supplications, O LORD. 7“O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation,
You have covered my head in the day of battle. 8“Do not grant, O LORD, the desires of the wicked;
Do not further their evil device, that they not be exalted. Selah. 9“Those who surround me raise their heads;
May the mischief of their own lips come upon them. 10“Let burning coals fall upon them;
Let them be thrown into the fire,
Into deep [water] pits from which they cannot rise. 11“Do not let a slanderer be established in the earth;
Let evil quickly hunt the violent man [to overthrow him and stop his evil acts].” 12I know [with confidence] that the LORD will maintain the cause of the afflicted,
And [will secure] justice for the poor. 13Surely the righteous will give thanks to Your name;
The upright will dwell in Your presence.

Psalm 141
An Evening Prayer For Sanctification And Protection.
A Psalm of David. 1LORD, I call upon You; hurry to me.
Listen to my voice when I call to You. 2Let my prayer be counted as incense before You;
The lifting up of my hands as the evening offering. 3Set a guard, O LORD, over my mouth;
Keep watch over the door of my lips [to keep me from speaking thoughtlessly]. 4Do not incline my heart to [consent to or tolerate] any evil thing,
Or to practice deeds of wickedness
With men who plan and do evil;
And let me not eat of their delicacies (be tempted by their gain). 5Let the righteous [thoughtfully] strike (correct) me—it is a kindness [done to encourage my spiritual maturity].
It is [the choicest anointing] oil on the head;
Let my head not refuse [to accept and acknowledge and learn from] it;
For still my prayer is against their wicked deeds. 6Their [wicked, godless] judges are thrown down the sides of the rocky cliff,
And they [who followed them] will hear my words, for they are pleasant (just). 7As when the one plows and breaks open the ground [and the soil scatters behind him],
Our bones have been scattered at the mouth of Sheol [by the injustices of the wicked]. 8For my eyes are toward You, O GOD, the Lord;
In You I take refuge; do not pour out my life nor leave me defenseless. 9Keep me from the jaws of the trap which they have set for me,
And from the snares of those who do evil. 10Let the wicked fall into their own nets,
While I pass by and safely escape [from danger].

Psalm 142
Prayer For Help In Trouble.
A skillful song, or a didactic or reflective poem, of David; when he was in the cave. A Prayer. 1I cry aloud with my voice to the LORD;
I make supplication with my voice to the LORD. 2I pour out my complaint before Him;
I declare my trouble before Him. 3When my spirit was overwhelmed and weak within me [wrapped in darkness],
You knew my path.
In the way where I walk
They have hidden a trap for me. 4Look to the right [the point of attack] and see;
For there is no one who has regard for me [to act in my favor].
Escape has failed me and I have nowhere to run;
No one cares about my life. 5I cried out to You, O LORD;
I said, “You are my refuge,
My portion in the land of the living. 6“Give attention to my cry,
For I am brought very low;
Rescue me from my persecutors,
For they are stronger than I. 7“Bring my soul out of prison (adversity),
So that I may give thanks and praise Your name;
The righteous will surround me [in triumph],
For You will look after me.”

Psalm 143
Prayer For Help And Guidance.
A Psalm of David. 1Hear my prayer, O LORD,
Listen to my supplications!
Answer me in Your faithfulness, and in Your righteousness. 2And do not enter into judgment with Your servant,
For in Your sight no man living is righteous or justified. 3For the enemy has persecuted me,
He has crushed my life down to the ground;
He has made me dwell in dark places, like those who have been long dead. 4Therefore my spirit is overwhelmed and weak within me [wrapped in darkness];
My heart grows numb within me. 5I remember the days of old;
I meditate on all that You have done;
I ponder the work of Your hands. 6I reach out my hands to You;
My throat thirsts for You, as a parched land [thirsts for water]. Selah. 7Answer me quickly, O LORD, my spirit fails;
Do not hide Your face from me,
Or I will become like those who go down into the pit (grave). 8Let me hear Your lovingkindness in the morning,
For I trust in You.
Teach me the way in which I should walk,
For I lift up my soul to You. 9Rescue me, O LORD, from my enemies;
I take refuge in You. 10Teach me to do Your will [so that I may please You],
For You are my God;
Let Your good Spirit lead me on level ground. 11Save my life, O LORD, for Your name’s sake;
In Your righteousness bring my life out of trouble. 12In your lovingkindness, silence and destroy my enemies
And destroy all those who afflict my life,
For I am Your servant.

Psalm 144
Prayer For Rescue And Prosperity.
A Psalm of David. 1Blessed be the LORD, my Rock and my great strength,
Who trains my hands for war
And my fingers for battle; 2My [steadfast] lovingkindness and my fortress,
My high tower and my rescuer,
My shield and He in whom I take refuge,
Who subdues my people under me. 3LORD, what is man that You take notice of him?
Or the son of man that You think of him? 4Man is like a mere breath;
His days are like a shadow that passes away. 5Bow Your heavens, O LORD, and come down;
Touch the mountains, and they will smoke. 6Flash lightning and scatter my enemies;
Send out Your arrows and confuse and embarrass and frustrate them. 7Stretch out Your hand from above;
Set me free and rescue me from great waters,
Out of the hands of [hostile] foreigners [who surround us] 8Whose mouths speak deceit [without restraint],
And whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood. 9I will sing a new song to You, O God;
Upon a harp of ten strings I will sing praises to You, 10Who gives salvation to kings,
Who sets David His servant free from the evil sword. 11Set me free and rescue me from the hand of [hostile] foreigners,
Whose mouth speaks deceit [without restraint],
And whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood. 12Let our sons in their youth be like plants full grown,
And our daughters like corner pillars fashioned for a palace; 13Let our barns be full, supplying every kind of produce,
And our flocks bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our fields; 14Let our cattle bear
Without mishap and without loss,
And let there be no outcry in our streets! 15How blessed and favored are the people in such circumstance;
How blessed [fortunate, prosperous, and favored] are the people whose God is the LORD!

Psalm 145
The LORD Extolled For His Goodness.
A Psalm of praise. Of David. 1I will exalt You, my God, O King,
And [with gratitude and submissive wonder] I will bless Your name forever and ever. 2Every day I will bless You and lovingly praise You;
Yes, [with awe-inspired reverence] I will praise Your name forever and ever. 3Great is the LORD, and highly to be praised,
And His greatness is [so vast and profound as to be] unsearchable [incomprehensible to man]. 4One generation shall praise Your works to another,
And shall declare Your mighty and remarkable acts. 5On the glorious splendor of Your majesty
And on Your wonderful works, I will meditate. 6People will speak of the power of Your awesome acts,
And [with gratitude and submissive wonder] I will tell of Your greatness. 7They will overflow [like a fountain] when they speak of Your great and abundant goodness
And will sing joyfully of Your righteousness. 8The LORD is gracious and full of compassion,
Slow to anger and abounding in lovingkindness. 9The LORD is good to all,
And His tender mercies are over all His works [the entirety of things created]. 10All Your works shall give thanks to You and praise You, O LORD,
And Your godly ones will bless You. 11They shall speak of the glory of Your kingdom
And talk of Your power, 12To make known to the sons of men Your mighty acts
And the glorious majesty of Your kingdom. 13Your kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
And Your dominion endures throughout all generations. 14The LORD upholds all those [of His own] who fall
And raises up all those who are bowed down. 15The eyes of all look to You [in hopeful expectation],
And You give them their food in due time. 16You open Your hand
And satisfy the desire of every living thing. 17The LORD is [unwaveringly] righteous in all His ways
And gracious and kind in all His works. 18The LORD is near to all who call on Him,
To all who call on Him in truth (without guile). 19He will fulfill the desire of those who fear and worship Him [with awe-inspired reverence and obedience];
He also will hear their cry and will save them. 20The LORD keeps all who love Him,
But all the wicked He will destroy. 21My mouth will speak the praise of the LORD,
And all flesh will bless and gratefully praise His holy name forever and ever.

Psalm 146
The LORD An Abundant Helper.
1Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)
Praise the LORD, O my soul! 2While I live I will praise the LORD;
I will sing praises to my God as long as I live. 3Do not trust in princes,
In mortal man, in whom there is no salvation (help). 4When his spirit leaves him, he returns to the earth;
In that very day his thoughts and plans perish. 5How blessed and graciously favored is he whose help is the God of Jacob (Israel),
Whose hope is in the LORD his God, 6Who made heaven and earth,
The sea, and all that is in them,
Who keeps truth and is faithful forever, 7Who executes justice for the oppressed,
Who gives food to the hungry.
The LORD sets free the prisoners. 8The LORD opens the eyes of the blind;
The LORD lifts up those who are bowed down;
The LORD loves the righteous [the upright in heart]. 9The LORD protects the strangers;
He supports the fatherless and the widow;
But He makes crooked the way of the wicked. 10The LORD shall reign forever,
Your God, O Zion, to all generations.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 147
Praise For Jerusalem’s Restoration And Prosperity.
1Praise the LORD!
For it is good to sing praises to our [gracious and majestic] God;
Praise is becoming and appropriate. 2The LORD is building up Jerusalem;
He is gathering [together] the exiles of Israel. 3He heals the brokenhearted
And binds up their wounds [healing their pain and comforting their sorrow]. 4He counts the number of the stars;
He calls them all by their names. 5Great is our [majestic and mighty] Lord and abundant in strength;
His understanding is inexhaustible [infinite, boundless]. 6The LORD lifts up the humble;
He casts the wicked down to the ground. 7Sing to the LORD with thanksgiving;
Sing praises to our God with the lyre, 8Who covers the heavens with clouds,
Who provides rain for the earth,
Who makes grass grow on the mountains. 9He gives to the beast its food,
And to the young ravens that for which they cry. 10He does not delight in the strength (military power) of the horse,
Nor does He take pleasure in the legs (strength) of a man. 11The LORD favors those who fear and worship Him [with awe-inspired reverence and obedience],
Those who wait for His mercy and lovingkindness. 12Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem!
Praise your God, O Zion! 13For He has strengthened the bars of your gates,
He has blessed your children within you. 14He makes peace in your borders;
He satisfies you with the finest of the wheat. 15He sends His command to the earth;
His word runs very swiftly. 16He gives [to the earth] snow like [a blanket of] wool;
He scatters the frost like ashes. 17He casts out His ice like fragments;
Who can stand before His cold? 18He sends out His word and melts the ice;
He causes His wind to blow and the waters to flow. 19He declares His word to Jacob,
His statutes and His ordinances to Israel. 20He has not dealt this way with any [other] nation;
They have not known [understood, appreciated, heeded, or cherished] His ordinances.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 148
The Whole Creation Invoked To Praise The LORD.
1Praise the LORD!
Praise the LORD from the heavens;
Praise Him in the heights! 2Praise Him, all His angels;
Praise Him, all His hosts (armies)! 3Praise Him, sun and moon:
Praise Him, all stars of light! 4Praise Him, highest heavens,
And the waters above the heavens! 5Let them praise the name of the LORD,
For He commanded and they were created. 6He has also established them forever and ever;
He has made a decree which shall not pass away. 7Praise the LORD from the earth,
Sea monsters and all deeps; 8Lightning and hail, snow and fog;
Stormy wind, fulfilling His orders; 9Mountains and all hills;
Fruitful trees and all cedars; 10Beasts and all cattle;
Creeping things and winged birds; 11Kings of the earth and all people;
Princes and all judges of the earth; 12Both young men and virgins;
Old men and children. 13Let them praise the name of the LORD,
For His name alone is exalted and supreme;
His glory and majesty are above earth and heaven. 14He has lifted up a horn for His people [giving them strength, prosperity, dignity, and preeminence],
Praise for all His godly ones;
For the people of Israel, a people near to Him.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 149
Israel Invoked To Praise The LORD.
1Praise the LORD!
Sing to the LORD a new song,
And praise Him in the congregation of His godly ones (believers). 2Let Israel rejoice in their Maker;
Let Zion’s children rejoice in their King. 3Let them praise His name with dancing;
Let them sing praises to Him with the tambourine and lyre. 4For the LORD takes pleasure in His people;
He will beautify the humble with salvation. 5Let the godly ones exult in glory;
Let them sing for joy on their beds. 6Let the high praises of God be in their throats,
And a two-edged sword in their hands, 7To execute vengeance on the nations
And punishment on the peoples, 8To bind their kings with chains
And their nobles with fetters of iron, 9To execute on them the judgment written.
This is the honor for all His godly ones.
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Psalm 150
A Psalm Of Praise.
1Praise the LORD!
Praise God in His sanctuary;
Praise Him in His mighty heavens. 2Praise Him for His mighty acts;
Praise Him according to [the abundance of] His greatness. 3Praise Him with trumpet sound;
Praise Him with harp and lyre. 4Praise Him with tambourine and dancing;
Praise Him with stringed instruments and flute. 5Praise Him with resounding cymbals;
Praise Him with loud cymbals. 6Let everything that has breath and every breath of life praise the LORD!
Praise the LORD! (Hallelujah!)

Proverbs 1
The Usefulness Of Proverbs
1The proverbs (truths obscurely expressed, maxims) of Solomon son of David, king of Israel: 2To know [skillful and godly] wisdom and instruction;
To discern and comprehend the words of understanding and insight, 3To receive instruction in wise behavior and the discipline of wise thoughtfulness,
Righteousness, justice, and integrity; 4That prudence (good judgment, astute common sense) may be given to the naive or inexperienced [who are easily misled],
And knowledge and discretion (intelligent discernment) to the youth, 5The wise will hear and increase their learning,
And the person of understanding will acquire wise counsel and the skill [to steer his course wisely and lead others to the truth], 6To understand a proverb and a figure [of speech] or an enigma with its interpretation,
And the words of the wise and their riddles [that require reflection]. 7The [reverent] fear of the LORD [that is, worshiping Him and regarding Him as truly awesome] is the beginning and the preeminent part of knowledge [its starting point and its essence];
But arrogant fools despise [skillful and godly] wisdom and instruction and self-discipline. The Enticement of Sinners 8My son, hear the instruction of your father,
And do not reject the teaching of your mother. 9For they are a garland of grace on your head,
And chains and ornaments [of gold] around your neck. 10My son, if sinners entice you,
Do not consent. 11If they say, “Come with us;
Let us lie in wait to shed blood,
Let us ambush the innocent without cause; 12Let us swallow them alive like Sheol (the place of the dead),
Even whole, as those who go down to the pit [of death]; 13We will find and take all kinds of precious possessions,
We will fill our houses with spoil; 14Throw in your lot with us [they insist];
We will all have one money bag [in common],” 15My son, do not walk on the road with them;
Keep your foot [far] away from their path, 16For their feet run to evil,
And they hurry to shed blood. 17Indeed, it is useless to spread the baited net
In the sight of any bird; 18But [when these people set a trap for others] they lie in wait for their own blood;
They set an ambush for their own lives [and rush to their destruction]. 19So are the ways of everyone who is greedy for gain;
Greed takes away the lives of its possessors. Wisdom Warns 20Wisdom shouts in the street,
She raises her voice in the markets; 21She calls out at the head of the noisy streets [where large crowds gather];
At the entrance of the city gates she speaks her words: 22“How long, O naive ones [you who are easily misled], will you love being simple-minded and undiscerning?
How long will scoffers [who ridicule and deride] delight in scoffing,
How long will fools [who obstinately mock truth] hate knowledge? 23“If you will turn and pay attention to my rebuke,
Behold, I [Wisdom] will pour out my spirit on you;
I will make my words known to you. 24“Because I called and you refused [to answer],
I stretched out my hand and no one has paid attention [to my offer]; 25And you treated all my counsel as nothing
And would not accept my reprimand, 26I also will laugh at your disaster;
I will mock when your dread and panic come, 27When your dread and panic come like a storm,
And your disaster comes like a whirlwind,
When anxiety and distress come upon you [as retribution]. 28“Then they will call upon me (Wisdom), but I will not answer;
They will seek me eagerly but they will not find me, 29Because they hated knowledge
And did not choose the fear of the LORD [that is, obeying Him with reverence and awe-filled respect], 30They would not accept my counsel,
And they spurned all my rebuke. 31“Therefore they shall eat of the fruit of their own [wicked] way
And be satiated with [the penalty of] their own devices. 32“For the turning away of the naive will kill them,
And the careless ease of [self-righteous] fools will destroy them. 33“But whoever listens to me (Wisdom) will live securely and in confident trust
And will be at ease, without fear or dread of evil.”

Proverbs 2
The Pursuit Of Wisdom Brings Security
1My son, if you will receive my words
And treasure my commandments within you, 2So that your ear is attentive to [skillful and godly] wisdom,
And apply your heart to understanding [seeking it conscientiously and striving for it eagerly]; 3Yes, if you cry out for insight,
And lift up your voice for understanding; 4If you seek skillful and godly wisdom as you would silver
And search for her as you would hidden treasures; 5Then you will understand the [reverent] fear of the LORD [that is, worshiping Him and regarding Him as truly awesome]
And discover the knowledge of God. 6For the LORD gives [skillful and godly] wisdom;
From His mouth come knowledge and understanding. 7He stores away sound wisdom for the righteous [those who are in right standing with Him];
He is a shield to those who walk in integrity [those of honorable character and moral courage], 8He guards the paths of justice;
And He preserves the way of His saints (believers). 9Then you will understand righteousness and justice [in every circumstance]
And integrity and every good path. 10For [skillful and godly] wisdom will enter your heart
And knowledge will be pleasant to your soul. 11Discretion will watch over you,
Understanding and discernment will guard you, 12To keep you from the way of evil and the evil man,
From the man who speaks perverse things; 13From those who leave the paths of uprightness
To walk in the ways of darkness; 14Who find joy in doing evil
And delight in the perversity of evil, 15Whose paths are crooked,
And who are devious in their ways; 16To keep you from the immoral woman;
From the seductress with her flattering words, 17Who leaves the companion (husband) of her youth,
And forgets the covenant of her God. 18For her house leads down to death
And her paths lead to the dead; 19None who go to her return again,
Nor do they regain the paths of life— 20So you will walk in the way of good men [that is, those of personal integrity, moral courage and honorable character],
And keep to the paths of the righteous. 21For the upright [those who are in right standing with God] will live in the land
And those [of integrity] who are blameless [in God’s sight] will remain in it; 22But the wicked will be cut off from the land
And the treacherous shall be [forcibly] uprooted and removed from it.

Proverbs 3
The Rewards Of Wisdom
1My son, do not forget my teaching,
But let your heart keep my commandments; 2For length of days and years of life [worth living]
And tranquility and prosperity [the wholeness of life’s blessings] they will add to you. 3Do not let mercy and kindness and truth leave you [instead let these qualities define you];
Bind them [securely] around your neck,
Write them on the tablet of your heart. 4So find favor and high esteem
In the sight of God and man. 5Trust in and rely confidently on the LORD with all your heart
And do not rely on your own insight or understanding. 6In all your ways know and acknowledge and recognize Him,
And He will make your paths straight and smooth [removing obstacles that block your way]. 7Do not be wise in your own eyes;
Fear the LORD [with reverent awe and obedience] and turn [entirely] away from evil. 8It will be health to your body [your marrow, your nerves, your sinews, your muscles—all your inner parts]
And refreshment (physical well-being) to your bones. 9Honor the LORD with your wealth
And with the first fruits of all your crops (income); 10Then your barns will be abundantly filled
And your vats will overflow with new wine. 11My son, do not reject or take lightly the discipline of the LORD [learn from your mistakes and the testing that comes from His correction through discipline];
Nor despise His rebuke, 12For those whom the LORD loves He corrects,
Even as a father corrects the son in whom he delights. 13Happy [blessed, considered fortunate, to be admired] is the man who finds [skillful and godly] wisdom,
And the man who gains understanding and insight [learning from God’s word and life’s experiences], 14For wisdom’s profit is better than the profit of silver,
And her gain is better than fine gold. 15She is more precious than rubies;
And nothing you can wish for compares with her [in value]. 16Long life is in her right hand;
In her left hand are riches and honor. 17Her ways are highways of pleasantness and favor,
And all her paths are peace. 18She is a tree of life to those who take hold of her,
And happy [blessed, considered fortunate, to be admired] is everyone who holds her tightly. 19The LORD by His wisdom has founded the earth;
By His understanding He has established the heavens. 20By His knowledge the deeps were broken up
And the clouds drip with dew. 21My son, let them not escape from your sight,
But keep sound wisdom and discretion, 22And they will be life to your soul (your inner self)
And a gracious adornment to your neck (your outer self). 23Then you will walk on your way [of life] securely
And your foot will not stumble. 24When you lie down, you will not be afraid;
When you lie down, your sleep will be sweet. 25Do not be afraid of sudden fear
Nor of the storm of the wicked when it comes [since you will be blameless]; 26For the LORD will be your confidence, firm and strong,
And will keep your foot from being caught [in a trap]. 27Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due [its rightful recipients],
When it is in your power to do it. 28Do not say to your neighbor, “Go, and come back,
And tomorrow I will give it,”
When you have it with you. 29Do not devise evil against your neighbor,
Who lives securely beside you. 30Do not quarrel with a man without cause,
If he has done you no harm. 31Do not envy a man of violence
And do not choose any of his ways. 32For the devious are repulsive to the LORD;
But His private counsel is with the upright [those with spiritual integrity and moral courage]. 33The curse of the LORD is on the house of the wicked,
But He blesses the home of the just and righteous. 34Though He scoffs at the scoffers and scorns the scorners,
Yet He gives His grace [His undeserved favor] to the humble [those who give up self-importance]. 35The wise will inherit honor and glory,
But dishonor and shame is conferred on fools.

Proverbs 4
A Father’s Instruction
1Hear, O children, the instruction of a father,
And pay attention [and be willing to learn] so that you may gain understanding and intelligent discernment. 2For I give you good doctrine;
Do not turn away from my instruction. 3When I was a son with my father (David),
Tender and the only son in the sight of my mother (Bathsheba), 4He taught me and said to me,
“Let your heart hold fast my words;
Keep my commandments and live. 5“Get [skillful and godly] wisdom! Acquire understanding [actively seek spiritual discernment, mature comprehension, and logical interpretation]!
Do not forget nor turn away from the words of my mouth. 6“Do not turn away from her (Wisdom) and she will guard and protect you;
Love her, and she will watch over you. 7“The beginning of wisdom is: Get [skillful and godly] wisdom [it is preeminent]!
And with all your acquiring, get understanding [actively seek spiritual discernment, mature comprehension, and logical interpretation]. 8“Prize wisdom [and exalt her], and she will exalt you;
She will honor you if you embrace her. 9“She will place on your head a garland of grace;
She will present you with a crown of beauty and glory.” 10Hear, my son, and accept my sayings,
And the years of your life will be many. 11I have instructed you in the way of [skillful and godly] wisdom;
I have led you in upright paths. 12When you walk, your steps will not be impeded [for your path will be clear and open];
And when you run, you will not stumble. 13Take hold of instruction; [actively seek it, grip it firmly and] do not let go.
Guard her, for she is your life. 14Do not enter the path of the wicked,
And do not go the way of evil men. 15Avoid it, do not travel on it;
Turn away from it and pass on. 16For the wicked cannot sleep unless they do evil;
And they are deprived of sleep unless they make someone stumble and fall. 17For they eat the bread of wickedness
And drink the wine of violence. 18But the path of the just (righteous) is like the light of dawn,
That shines brighter and brighter until [it reaches its full strength and glory in] the perfect day. 19The way of the wicked is like [deep] darkness;
They do not know over what they stumble. 20My son, pay attention to my words and be willing to learn;
Open your ears to my sayings. 21Do not let them escape from your sight;
Keep them in the center of your heart. 22For they are life to those who find them,
And healing and health to all their flesh. 23Watch over your heart with all diligence,
For from it flow the springs of life. 24Put away from you a deceitful (lying, misleading) mouth,
And put devious lips far from you. 25Let your eyes look directly ahead [toward the path of moral courage]
And let your gaze be fixed straight in front of you [toward the path of integrity]. 26Consider well and watch carefully the path of your feet,
And all your ways will be steadfast and sure. 27Do not turn away to the right nor to the left [where evil may lurk];
Turn your foot from [the path of] evil.

Proverbs 5
Pitfalls Of Immorality
1My son, be attentive to my wisdom [godly wisdom learned by costly experience],
Incline your ear to my understanding; 2That you may exercise discrimination and discretion (good judgment),
And your lips may reserve knowledge and answer wisely [to temptation]. 3For the lips of an immoral woman drip honey [like a honeycomb]
And her speech is smoother than oil; 4But in the end she is bitter like [the extract of] wormwood,
Sharp as a two-edged sword. 5Her feet go down to death;
Her steps take hold of Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead), 6So that she does not think [seriously] about the path of life;
Her ways are aimless and unstable; you cannot know where her path leads. 7Now then, my sons, listen to me
And do not depart from (forget) the words of my mouth. 8Let your way [in life] be far from her,
And do not go near the door of her house [avoid even being near the places of temptation], 9Or you will give your honor to others,
And your years to the cruel one, 10And strangers will be filled with your strength
And your hard-earned wealth will go to the house of a foreigner [who does not know God]; 11And you will groan when your life is ending,
When your flesh and your body are consumed; 12And you say, “How I hated instruction and discipline,
And my heart despised correction and reproof! 13“I have not listened to the voice of my teachers,
Nor have I inclined my ear to those who instructed me. 14“I was almost in total ruin
In the midst of the assembly and congregation.” 15Drink water from your own cistern [of a pure marriage relationship]
And fresh running water from your own well. 16Should your springs (children) be dispersed,
As streams of water in the streets? 17[Confine yourself to your own wife.] Let your children be yours alone,
And not the children of strangers with you. 18Let your fountain (wife) be blessed [with the rewards of fidelity],
And rejoice in the wife of your youth. 19Let her be as a loving hind and graceful doe,
Let her breasts refresh and satisfy you at all times;
Always be exhilarated and delight in her love. 20Why should you, my son, be exhilarated with an immoral woman
And embrace the bosom of an outsider (pagan)? 21For the ways of man are directly before the eyes of the LORD,
And He carefully watches all of his paths [all of his comings and goings]. 22The iniquities done by a wicked man will trap him,
And he will be held with the cords of his sin. 23He will die for lack of instruction (discipline),
And in the greatness of his foolishness he will go astray and be lost.

Proverbs 6
Parental Counsel
1My son, if you have become surety (guaranteed a debt or obligation) for your neighbor,
If you have given your pledge for [the debt of] a stranger or another [outside your family], 2If you have been snared with the words of your lips,
If you have been trapped by the speech of your mouth, 3Do this now, my son, and release yourself [from the obligation];
Since you have come into the hand of your neighbor,
Go humble yourself, and plead with your neighbor [to pay his debt and release you]. 4Give no [unnecessary] sleep to your eyes,
Nor slumber to your eyelids; 5Tear yourself away like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter
And like a bird from the hand of the fowler. 6Go to the ant, O lazy one;
Observe her ways and be wise, 7Which, having no chief,
Overseer or ruler, 8She prepares her food in the summer
And brings in her provisions [of food for the winter] in the harvest. 9How long will you lie down, O lazy one?
When will you arise from your sleep [and learn self-discipline]? 10“Yet a little sleep, a little slumber,
A little folding of the hands to lie down and rest”— 11So your poverty will come like an approaching prowler who walks [slowly, but surely]
And your need [will come] like an armed man [making you helpless]. 12A worthless person, a wicked man,
Is one who walks with a perverse (corrupt, vulgar) mouth. 13Who winks with his eyes [in mockery], who shuffles his feet [to signal],
Who points with his fingers [to give subversive instruction]; 14Who perversely in his heart plots trouble and evil continually;
Who spreads discord and strife. 15Therefore [the crushing weight of] his disaster will come suddenly upon him;
Instantly he will be broken, and there will be no healing or remedy [because he has no heart for God]. 16These six things the LORD hates;
Indeed, seven are repulsive to Him: 17A proud look [the attitude that makes one overestimate oneself and discount others], a lying tongue,
And hands that shed innocent blood, 18A heart that creates wicked plans,
Feet that run swiftly to evil, 19A false witness who breathes out lies [even half-truths],
And one who spreads discord (rumors) among brothers. 20My son, be guided by your father’s [God-given] commandment (instruction)
And do not reject the teaching of your mother; 21Bind them continually upon your heart (in your thoughts),
And tie them around your neck. 22When you walk about, they (the godly teachings of your parents) will guide you;
When you sleep, they will keep watch over you;
And when you awake, they will talk to you. 23For the commandment is a lamp, and the teaching [of the law] is light,
And reproofs (rebukes) for discipline are the way of life, 24To keep you from the evil woman,
From [the flattery of] the smooth tongue of an immoral woman. 25Do not desire (lust after) her beauty in your heart,
Nor let her capture you with her eyelashes. 26For on account of a prostitute one is reduced to a piece of bread [to be eaten up],
And the immoral woman hunts [with a hook] the precious life [of a man]. 27Can a man take fire to his chest
And his clothes not be burned? 28Or can a man walk on hot coals
And his feet not be scorched? 29So is the one who goes in to his neighbor’s wife;
Whoever touches her will not be found innocent or go unpunished. 30People do not despise a thief if he steals
To satisfy himself when he is hungry; 31But when he is found, he must repay seven times [what he stole];
He must give all the property of his house [if necessary to meet his fine]. 32But whoever commits adultery with a woman lacks common sense and sound judgment and an understanding [of moral principles];
He who would destroy his soul does it. 33Wounds and disgrace he will find,
And his reproach (blame) will not be blotted out. 34For jealousy enrages the [wronged] husband;
He will not spare [the guilty one] on the day of vengeance. 35He will not accept any ransom [offered to buy him off from demanding full punishment];
Nor will he be satisfied though you offer him many gifts (bribes).

Proverbs 7
The Wiles Of The Prostitute
1My son, keep my words
And treasure my commandments within you [so they are readily available to guide you]. 2Keep my commandments and live,
And keep my teaching and law as the apple of your eye. 3Bind them [securely] on your fingers;
Write them on the tablet of your heart. 4Say to [skillful and godly] wisdom, “You are my sister,”
And regard understanding and intelligent insight as your intimate friends; 5That they may keep you from the immoral woman,
From the foreigner [who does not observe God’s laws and] who flatters with her [smooth] words. 6For at the window of my house
I looked out through my lattice. 7And among the naive [the inexperienced and gullible],
I saw among the youths
A young man lacking [good] sense, 8Passing through the street near her corner;
And he took the path to her house 9In the twilight, in the evening;
In the black and dark night. 10And there a woman met him,
Dressed as a prostitute and sly and cunning of heart. 11She was boisterous and rebellious;
She would not stay at home. 12At times she was in the streets, at times in the market places,
Lurking and setting her ambush at every corner. 13So she caught him and kissed him
And with a brazen and impudent face she said to him: 14“I have peace offerings with me;
Today I have paid my vows. 15“So I came out to meet you [that you might share with me the feast of my offering],
Diligently I sought your face and I have found you. 16“I have spread my couch with coverings and cushions of tapestry,
With colored fine linen of Egypt. 17“I have perfumed my bed
With myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. 18“Come, let us drink our fill of love until morning;
Let us console and delight ourselves with love. 19“For my husband is not at home.
He has gone on a long journey; 20He has taken a bag of money with him,
And he will come home on the appointed day.” 21With her many persuasions she caused him to yield;
With her flattering lips she seduced him. 22Suddenly he went after her, as an ox goes to the slaughter [not knowing the outcome],
Or as one in stocks going to the correction [to be given] to a fool, 23Until an arrow pierced his liver [with a mortal wound];
Like a bird fluttering straight into the net,
He did not know that it would cost him his life. 24Now therefore, my sons, listen to me,
And pay attention to the words of my mouth. 25Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways,
Do not stray into her [evil, immoral] paths. 26For she has cast down many [mortally] wounded;
Indeed, all who were killed by her were strong. 27Her house is the way to Sheol,
Descending to the chambers of death.

Proverbs 8
The Commendation Of Wisdom
1Does not wisdom call,
And understanding lift up her voice? 2On the top of the heights beside the way,
Where the paths meet, wisdom takes her stand; 3Beside the gates, at the entrance to the city,
At the entrance of the doors, she cries out: 4“To you, O men, I call,
And my voice is directed to the sons of men. 5“O you naive or inexperienced [who are easily misled], understand prudence and seek astute common sense;
And, O you [closed-minded, self-confident] fools, understand wisdom [seek the insight and self-discipline that leads to godly living]. 6“Listen, for I will speak excellent and noble things;
And the opening of my lips will reveal right things. 7“For my mouth will utter truth,
And wickedness is repulsive and loathsome to my lips. 8“All the words of my mouth are in righteousness (upright, in right standing with God);
There is nothing contrary to truth or perverted (crooked) in them. 9“They are all straightforward to him who understands [with an open and willing mind],
And right to those who find knowledge and live by it. 10“Take my instruction rather than [seeking] silver,
And take knowledge rather than choicest gold, 11“For wisdom is better than rubies;
And all desirable things cannot compare with her. 12“I, [godly] wisdom, reside with prudence [good judgment, moral courage and astute common sense],
And I find knowledge and discretion. 13“The [reverent] fear and worshipful awe of the LORD includes the hatred of evil;
Pride and arrogance and the evil way,
And the perverted mouth, I hate. 14“Counsel is mine and sound wisdom;
I am understanding, power and strength are mine. 15“By me kings reign
And rulers decide and decree justice. 16“By me princes rule, and nobles,
All who judge and govern rightly. 17“I love those who love me;
And those who seek me early and diligently will find me. 18“Riches and honor are with me,
Enduring wealth and righteousness (right standing with God). 19“My fruit is better than gold, even pure gold,
And my yield is better than choicest silver. 20“I, [Wisdom, continuously] walk in the way of righteousness,
In the midst of the paths of justice, 21That I may cause those who love me to inherit wealth and true riches,
And that I may fill their treasuries. 22“The LORD created and possessed me at the beginning of His way,
Before His works of old [were accomplished]. 23“From everlasting I was established and ordained,
From the beginning, before the earth existed, [I, godly wisdom, existed]. 24“When there were no ocean depths I was born,
When there were no fountains and springs overflowing with water. 25“Before the mountains were settled,
Before the hills, I was born; 26While He had not yet made the earth and the fields,
Or the first of the dust of the earth. 27“When He established the heavens, I [Wisdom] was there;
When He drew a circle upon the face of the deep, 28When He made firm the skies above,
When the fountains and springs of the deep became fixed and strong, 29When He set for the sea its boundary
So that the waters would not transgress [the boundaries set by] His command,
When He marked out the foundations of the earth— 30Then I was beside Him, as a master craftsman;
And I was daily His delight;
Rejoicing before Him always, 31Rejoicing in the world, His inhabited earth,
And having my delight in the sons of men. 32“Now therefore, O sons, listen to me,
For blessed [happy, prosperous, to be admired] are they who keep my ways. 33“Heed (pay attention to) instruction and be wise,
And do not ignore or neglect it. 34“Blessed [happy, prosperous, to be admired] is the man who listens to me,
Watching daily at my gates,
Waiting at my doorposts. 35“For whoever finds me (Wisdom) finds life
And obtains favor and grace from the LORD. 36“But he who fails to find me or sins against me injures himself;
All those who hate me love and court death.”

Proverbs 9
Wisdom’s Invitation
1Wisdom has built her [spacious and sufficient] house;
She has hewn out and set up her seven pillars. 2She has prepared her food, she has mixed her wine;
She has also set her table. 3She has sent out her maidens, she calls
From the highest places of the city: 4“Whoever is naive or inexperienced, let him turn in here!”
As for him who lacks understanding, she says, 5“Come, eat my food
And drink the wine I have mixed [and accept my gifts]. 6“Leave [behind] your foolishness [and the foolish] and live,
And walk in the way of insight and understanding.” 7He who corrects and instructs a scoffer gets dishonor for himself,
And he who rebukes a wicked man gets insults for himself. 8Do not correct a scoffer [who foolishly ridicules and takes no responsibility for his error] or he will hate you;
Correct a wise man [who learns from his error], and he will love you. 9Give instruction to a wise man and he will become even wiser;
Teach a righteous man and he will increase his learning. 10The [reverent] fear of the LORD [that is, worshiping Him and regarding Him as truly awesome] is the beginning and the preeminent part of wisdom [its starting point and its essence],
And the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding and spiritual insight. 11For by me (wisdom from God) your days will be multiplied,
And years of life shall be increased. 12If you are wise, you are wise for yourself [for your own benefit];
If you scoff [thoughtlessly ridicule and disdain], you alone will pay the penalty. 13The foolish woman is restless and noisy;
She is naive and easily misled and thoughtless, and knows nothing at all [of eternal value]. 14She sits at the doorway of her house,
On a seat by the high and conspicuous places of the city, 15Calling to those who pass by,
Who are making their paths straight: 16“Whoever is naive or inexperienced, let him turn in here!”
And to him who lacks understanding (common sense), she says, 17“Stolen waters (pleasures) are sweet [because they are forbidden];
And bread eaten in secret is pleasant.” 18But he does not know that the spirits of the dead are there,
And that her guests are [already] in the depths of Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead).

Proverbs 10
Contrast Of The Righteous And The Wicked
1The proverbs of Solomon: A wise son makes a father glad,
But a foolish [stubborn] son [who refuses to learn] is a grief to his mother. 2Treasures of wickedness and ill-gotten gains do not profit,
But righteousness and moral integrity in daily life rescues from death. 3The LORD will not allow the righteous to hunger [God will meet all his needs],
But He will reject and cast away the craving of the wicked. 4Poor is he who works with a negligent and idle hand,
But the hand of the diligent makes him rich. 5He who gathers during summer and takes advantage of his opportunities is a son who acts wisely,
But he who sleeps during harvest and ignores the moment of opportunity is a son who acts shamefully. 6Blessings are on the head of the righteous [the upright, those in right standing with God],
But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence. 7The memory of the righteous [person] is a blessing,
But the name of the wicked will [be forgotten and] rot [like a corpse]. 8The wise in heart [are willing to learn so they] will accept and obey commands (instruction),
But the babbling fool [who is arrogant and thinks himself wise] will come to ruin. 9He who walks in integrity and with moral character walks securely,
But he who takes a crooked way will be discovered and punished. 10He who [maliciously] winks the eye [of evil intent] causes trouble;
And the babbling fool [who is arrogant and thinks himself wise] will come to ruin. 11The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life and his words of wisdom are a source of blessing,
But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence and evil. 12Hatred stirs up strife,
But love covers and overwhelms all transgressions [forgiving and overlooking another’s faults]. 13On the lips of the discerning, [skillful and godly] wisdom is found,
But discipline and the rod are for the back of the one who is without common sense and understanding. 14Wise men store up and treasure knowledge [in mind and heart],
But with the mouth of the foolish, ruin is at hand. 15The rich man’s wealth is his fortress;
The ruin of the poor is their poverty. 16The wages of the righteous [the upright, those in right standing with God] is [a worthwhile, meaningful] life,
The income of the wicked, punishment. 17He who learns from instruction and correction is on the [right] path of life [and for others his example is a path toward wisdom and blessing],
But he who ignores and refuses correction goes off course [and for others his example is a path toward sin and ruin]. 18He who hides hatred has lying lips,
And he who spreads slander is a fool. 19When there are many words, transgression and offense are unavoidable,
But he who controls his lips and keeps thoughtful silence is wise. 20The tongue of the righteous is like precious silver (greatly valued);
The heart of the wicked is worth little. 21The lips of the righteous feed and guide many,
But fools [who reject God and His wisdom] die for lack of understanding. 22The blessing of the LORD brings [true] riches,
And He adds no sorrow to it [for it comes as a blessing from God]. 23Engaging in evil is like sport to the fool [who refuses wisdom and chases sin],
But to a man of understanding [skillful and godly] wisdom brings joy. 24What the wicked fears will come upon him,
But the desire of the righteous [for the blessings of God] will be granted. 25When the whirlwind passes, the wicked is no more,
But the righteous has an everlasting foundation. 26Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes,
So is the lazy one to those who send him to work. 27The [reverent] fear of the LORD [worshiping, obeying, serving, and trusting Him with awe-filled respect] prolongs one’s life,
But the years of the wicked will be shortened. 28The hope of the righteous [those of honorable character and integrity] is joy,
But the expectation of the wicked [those who oppose God and ignore His wisdom] comes to nothing. 29The way of the LORD is a stronghold to the upright,
But it is ruin to those who do evil. 30The [consistently] righteous will never be shaken,
But the wicked will not inhabit the earth. 31The mouth of the righteous flows with [skillful and godly] wisdom,
But the perverted tongue will be cut out. 32The lips of the righteous know (speak) what is acceptable,
But the mouth of the wicked knows (speaks) what is perverted (twisted).

Proverbs 11
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1A false balance and dishonest business practices are extremely offensive to the LORD,
But an accurate scale is His delight. 2When pride comes [boiling up with an arrogant attitude of self-importance], then come dishonor and shame,
But with the humble [the teachable who have been chiseled by trial and who have learned to walk humbly with God] there is wisdom and soundness of mind. 3The integrity and moral courage of the upright will guide them,
But the crookedness of the treacherous will destroy them. 4Riches will not provide security in the day of wrath and judgment,
But righteousness rescues from death. 5The righteousness of the blameless will smooth their way and keep it straight,
But the wicked will fall by his own wickedness. 6The righteousness of the upright will rescue them,
But the treacherous will be caught by their own greed. 7When the wicked man dies, his expectation will perish;
And the hope of [godless] strong men perishes. 8The righteous is rescued from trouble,
And the wicked takes his place. 9With his mouth the godless man destroys his neighbor,
But through knowledge and discernment the righteous will be rescued. 10When it goes well for the righteous, the city rejoices,
And when the wicked perish, there are shouts of joy. 11By the blessing [of the influence] of the upright the city is exalted,
But by the mouth of the wicked it is torn down. 12He who despises his neighbor lacks sense,
But a man of understanding keeps silent. 13He who goes about as a gossip reveals secrets,
But he who is trustworthy and faithful keeps a matter hidden. 14Where there is no [wise, intelligent] guidance, the people fall [and go off course like a ship without a helm],
But in the abundance of [wise and godly] counselors there is victory. 15He who puts up security and guarantees a debt for an outsider will surely suffer [for his foolishness],
But he who hates (declines) being a guarantor is secure [from its penalties]. 16A gracious and good woman attains honor,
And ruthless men attain riches [but not respect]. 17The merciful and generous man benefits his soul [for his behavior returns to bless him],
But the cruel and callous man does himself harm. 18The wicked man earns deceptive wages,
But he who sows righteousness and lives his life with integrity will have a true reward [that is both permanent and satisfying]. 19He who is steadfast in righteousness attains life,
But he who pursues evil attains his own death. 20The perverse in heart are repulsive and shamefully vile to the LORD,
But those who are blameless and above reproach in their walk are His delight! 21Assuredly, the evil man will not go unpunished,
But the descendants of the righteous will be freed. 22As a ring of gold in a swine’s snout,
So is a beautiful woman who is without discretion [her lack of character mocks her beauty]. 23The desire of the righteous brings only good,
But the expectation of the wicked brings wrath. 24There is the one who [generously] scatters [abroad], and yet increases all the more;
And there is the one who withholds what is justly due, but it results only in want and poverty. 25The generous man [is a source of blessing and] shall be prosperous and enriched,
And he who waters will himself be watered [reaping the generosity he has sown]. 26The people curse him who holds back grain [when the public needs it],
But a blessing [from God and man] is upon the head of him who sells it. 27He who diligently seeks good seeks favor and grace,
But he who seeks evil, evil will come to him. 28He who leans on and trusts in and is confident in his riches will fall,
But the righteous [who trust in God’s provision] will flourish like a green leaf. 29He who troubles (mismanages) his own house will inherit the wind (nothing),
And the foolish will be a servant to the wise-hearted. 30The fruit of the [consistently] righteous is a tree of life,
And he who is wise captures and wins souls [for God—he gathers them for eternity]. 31If the righteous will be rewarded on the earth [with godly blessings],
How much more [will] the wicked and the sinner [be repaid with punishment]!

Proverbs 12
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1Whoever loves instruction and discipline loves knowledge,
But he who hates reproof and correction is stupid. 2A good man will obtain favor from the LORD,
But He will condemn a man who devises evil. 3A man will not be established by wickedness,
But the root of the [consistently] righteous will not be moved. 4A virtuous and excellent wife [worthy of honor] is the crown of her husband,
But she who shames him [with her foolishness] is like rottenness in his bones. 5The thoughts and purposes of the [consistently] righteous are just (honest, reliable),
But the counsels and schemes of the wicked are deceitful. 6The [malevolent] words of the wicked lie in wait for [innocent] blood [to slander],
But the mouth of the upright will rescue and protect them. 7The wicked are overthrown [by their evil] and are no more,
But the house of the [consistently] righteous will stand [securely]. 8A man will be commended according to his insight and sound judgment,
But the one who is of a perverse mind will be despised. 9Better is he who is lightly esteemed and has a servant,
Than he who [boastfully] honors himself [pretending to be what he is not] and lacks bread. 10A righteous man has kind regard for the life of his animal,
But even the compassion of the wicked is cruel. 11He who tills his land will have plenty of bread,
But he who follows worthless things lacks common sense and good judgment. 12The wicked desire the plunder of evil men,
But the root of the righteous yields richer fruit. 13An evil man is [dangerously] ensnared by the transgression of his lips,
But the righteous will escape from trouble. 14A man will be satisfied with good from the fruit of his words,
And the deeds of a man’s hands will return to him [as a harvest]. 15The way of the [arrogant] fool [who rejects God’s wisdom] is right in his own eyes,
But a wise and prudent man is he who listens to counsel. 16The [arrogant] fool’s anger is quickly known [because he lacks self-control and common sense],
But a prudent man ignores an insult. 17He who speaks truth [when he testifies] tells what is right,
But a false witness utters deceit [in court]. 18There is one who speaks rashly like the thrusts of a sword,
But the tongue of the wise brings healing. 19Truthful lips will be established forever,
But a lying tongue is [credited] only for a moment. 20Deceit is in the heart of those who devise evil,
But counselors of peace have joy. 21No harm befalls the righteous,
But the wicked are filled with trouble. 22Lying lips are extremely disgusting to the LORD,
But those who deal faithfully are His delight. 23A shrewd man is reluctant to display his knowledge [until the proper time],
But the heart of [over-confident] fools proclaims foolishness. 24The hand of the diligent will rule,
But the negligent and lazy will be put to forced labor. 25Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,
But a good (encouraging) word makes it glad. 26The righteous man is a guide to his neighbor,
But the way of the wicked leads them astray. 27The lazy man does not catch and roast his prey,
But the precious possession of a [wise] man is diligence [because he recognizes opportunities and seizes them]. 28In the way of righteousness is life,
And in its pathway there is no death [but immortality—eternal life].

Proverbs 13
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1A wise son heeds and accepts [and is the result of] his father’s discipline and instruction,
But a scoffer does not listen to reprimand and does not learn from his errors. 2From the fruit of his mouth a [wise] man enjoys good,
But the desire of the treacherous is for violence. 3The one who guards his mouth [thinking before he speaks] protects his life;
The one who opens his lips wide [and chatters without thinking] comes to ruin. 4The soul (appetite) of the lazy person craves and gets nothing [for lethargy overcomes ambition],
But the soul (appetite) of the diligent [who works willingly] is rich and abundantly supplied. 5A righteous man hates lies,
But a wicked man is loathsome, and he acts shamefully. 6Righteousness (being in right standing with God) guards the one whose way is blameless,
But wickedness undermines and overthrows the sinner. 7There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has nothing at all;
Another pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth. 8The ransom for a man’s life is his wealth,
But the poor man does not even have to listen to a rebuke or threats [from the envious]. 9The light of the righteous [within him—grows brighter and] rejoices,
But the lamp of the wicked [is a temporary light and] goes out. 10Through pride and presumption come nothing but strife,
But [skillful and godly] wisdom is with those who welcome [well-advised] counsel. 11Wealth obtained by fraud dwindles,
But he who gathers gradually by [honest] labor will increase [his riches]. 12Hope deferred makes the heart sick,
But when desire is fulfilled, it is a tree of life. 13Whoever despises the word and counsel [of God] brings destruction upon himself,
But he who [reverently] fears and respects the commandment [of God] will be rewarded. 14The teaching of the wise is a fountain and source of life,
So that one may avoid the snares of death. 15Good understanding wins favor [from others],
But the way of the unfaithful is hard [like barren, dry soil]. 16Every prudent and self-disciplined man acts with knowledge,
But a [closed-minded] fool [who refuses to learn] displays his foolishness [for all to see]. 17A wicked messenger falls into hardship,
But a faithful ambassador brings healing. 18Poverty and shame will come to him who refuses instruction and discipline,
But he who accepts and learns from reproof or censure is honored. 19Desire realized is sweet to the soul;
But it is detestable to fools to turn away from evil [which they have planned]. 20He who walks [as a companion] with wise men will be wise,
But the companions of [conceited, dull-witted] fools [are fools themselves and] will experience harm. 21Adversity pursues sinners,
But the [consistently] upright will be rewarded with prosperity. 22A good man leaves an inheritance to his children’s children,
And the wealth of the sinner is stored up for [the hands of] the righteous. 23Abundant food is in the fallow (uncultivated) ground of the poor,
But [without protection] it is swept away by injustice. 24He who withholds the rod [of discipline] hates his son,
But he who loves him disciplines and trains him diligently and appropriately [with wisdom and love]. 25The [consistently] righteous has enough to satisfy his appetite,
But the stomach of the wicked is in need [of bread].

Proverbs 14
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1The wise woman builds her house [on a foundation of godly precepts, and her household thrives],
But the foolish one [who lacks spiritual insight] tears it down with her own hands [by ignoring godly principles]. 2He who walks in uprightness [reverently] fears the LORD [and obeys and worships Him with profound respect],
But he who is devious in his ways despises Him. 3In the mouth of the [arrogant] fool [who rejects God] is a rod for his back,
But the lips of the wise [when they speak with godly wisdom] will protect them. 4Where there are no oxen, the manger is clean,
But much revenue [because of good crops] comes by the strength of the ox. 5A faithful and trustworthy witness will not lie,
But a false witness speaks lies. 6A scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none [for his ears are closed to wisdom],
But knowledge is easy for one who understands [because he is willing to learn]. 7Leave the presence of a [shortsighted] fool,
For you will not find knowledge or hear godly wisdom from his lips. 8The wisdom of the sensible is to understand his way,
But the foolishness of [shortsighted] fools is deceit. 9Fools mock sin [but sin mocks the fools],
But among the upright there is good will and the favor and blessing of God. 10The heart knows its own bitterness,
And no stranger shares its joy. 11The house of the wicked will be overthrown,
But the tent of the upright will thrive. 12There is a way which seems right to a man and appears straight before him,
But its end is the way of death. 13Even in laughter the heart may be in pain,
And the end of joy may be grief. 14The backslider in heart will have his fill with his own [rotten] ways,
But a good man will be satisfied with his ways [the godly thought and action which his heart pursues and in which he delights]. 15The naive or inexperienced person [is easily misled and] believes every word he hears,
But the prudent man [is discreet and astute and] considers well where he is going. 16A wise man suspects danger and cautiously avoids evil,
But the fool is arrogant and careless. 17A quick-tempered man acts foolishly and without self-control,
And a man of wicked schemes is hated. 18The naive [are unsophisticated and easy to exploit and] inherit foolishness,
But the sensible [are thoughtful and far-sighted and] are crowned with knowledge. 19The evil will bow down before the good,
And the wicked [will bow down] at the gates of the righteous. 20The poor man is hated even by his neighbor,
But those who love the rich are many. 21He who despises his neighbor sins [against God and his fellow man],
But happy [blessed and favored by God] is he who is gracious and merciful to the poor. 22Do they not go astray who devise evil and wander from the way of righteousness?
But kindness and truth will be to those who devise good. 23In all labor there is profit,
But mere talk leads only to poverty. 24The crown of the wise is their wealth [of wisdom],
But the foolishness of [closed-minded] fools is [nothing but] folly. 25A truthful witness saves lives,
But he who speaks lies is treacherous. 26In the [reverent] fear of the LORD there is strong confidence,
And His children will [always] have a place of refuge. 27The [reverent] fear of the LORD [that leads to obedience and worship] is a fountain of life,
So that one may avoid the snares of death. 28In a multitude of people is a king’s glory,
But in a lack of people is a [pretentious] prince’s ruin. 29He who is slow to anger has great understanding [and profits from his self-control],
But he who is quick-tempered exposes and exalts his foolishness [for all to see]. 30A calm and peaceful and tranquil heart is life and health to the body,
But passion and envy are like rottenness to the bones. 31He who oppresses the poor taunts and insults his Maker,
But he who is kind and merciful and gracious to the needy honors Him. 32The wicked is overthrown through his wrongdoing,
But the righteous has hope and confidence and a refuge [with God] even in death. 33Wisdom rests [silently] in the heart of one who has understanding,
But what is in the heart of [shortsighted] fools is made known. 34Righteousness [moral and spiritual integrity and virtuous character] exalts a nation,
But sin is a disgrace to any people. 35The king’s favor and good will are toward a servant who acts wisely and discreetly,
But his anger and wrath are toward him who acts shamefully.

Proverbs 15
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1A soft and gentle and thoughtful answer turns away wrath,
But harsh and painful and careless words stir up anger. 2The tongue of the wise speaks knowledge that is pleasing and acceptable,
But the [babbling] mouth of fools spouts folly. 3The eyes of the LORD are in every place,
Watching the evil and the good [in all their endeavors]. 4A soothing tongue [speaking words that build up and encourage] is a tree of life,
But a perversive tongue [speaking words that overwhelm and depress] crushes the spirit. 5A [flippant, arrogant] fool rejects his father’s instruction and correction,
But he who [is willing to learn and] regards and keeps in mind a reprimand acquires good sense. 6Great and priceless treasure is in the house of the [consistently] righteous one [who seeks godly instruction and grows in wisdom],
But trouble is in the income of the wicked one [who rejects the laws of God]. 7The lips of the wise spread knowledge [sifting it as chaff from the grain];
But the hearts of [shortsighted] fools are not so. 8The sacrifice of the wicked is hateful and exceedingly offensive to the LORD,
But the prayer of the upright is His delight! 9The way [of life] of the wicked is hateful and exceedingly offensive to the LORD,
But He loves one who pursues righteousness [personal integrity, moral courage and honorable character]. 10There is severe discipline for him who turns from the way [of righteousness];
And he who hates correction will die. 11Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) and Abaddon (the abyss, the place of eternal punishment) lie open before the LORD—
How much more the hearts and inner motives of the children of men. 12A scoffer [unlike a wise man] resents one who rebukes him and tries to teach him;
Nor will he go to the wise [for counsel and instruction]. 13A heart full of joy and goodness makes a cheerful face,
But when a heart is full of sadness the spirit is crushed. 14The mind of the intelligent and discerning seeks knowledge and eagerly inquires after it,
But the mouth of the [stubborn] fool feeds on foolishness. 15All the days of the afflicted are bad,
But a glad heart has a continual feast [regardless of the circumstances]. 16Better is a little with the [reverent, worshipful] fear of the LORD
Than great treasure and trouble with it. 17Better is a dinner of vegetables and herbs where love is present
Than a fattened ox served with hatred. 18A hot-tempered man stirs up strife,
But he who is slow to anger and patient calms disputes. 19The way of the lazy is like a hedge of thorns [it pricks, lacerates, and entangles him],
But the way [of life] of the upright is smooth and open like a highway. 20A wise son makes a father glad,
But a foolish man despises his mother. 21Foolishness is joy to him who is without heart and lacks [intelligent, common] sense,
But a man of understanding walks uprightly [making his course straight]. 22Without consultation and wise advice, plans are frustrated,
But with many counselors they are established and succeed. 23A man has joy in giving an appropriate answer,
And how good and delightful is a word spoken at the right moment—how good it is! 24The [chosen] path of life leads upward for the wise,
That he may keep away from Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) below. 25The LORD will tear down the house of the proud and arrogant (self-righteous),
But He will establish and protect the boundaries [of the land] of the [godly] widow. 26Evil plans and thoughts of the wicked are exceedingly vile and offensive to the LORD,
But pure words are pleasant words to Him. 27He who profits unlawfully brings suffering to his own house,
But he who hates bribes [and does not receive nor pay them] will live. 28The heart of the righteous thinks carefully about how to answer [in a wise and appropriate and timely way],
But the [babbling] mouth of the wicked pours out malevolent things. 29The LORD is far from the wicked [and distances Himself from them],
But He hears the prayer of the [consistently] righteous [that is, those with spiritual integrity and moral courage]. 30The light of the eyes rejoices the hearts of others,
And good news puts fat on the bones. 31The ear that listens to and learns from the life-giving rebuke (reprimand, censure)
Will remain among the wise. 32He who neglects and ignores instruction and discipline despises himself,
But he who learns from rebuke acquires understanding [and grows in wisdom]. 33The [reverent] fear of the LORD [that is, worshiping Him and regarding Him as truly awesome] is the instruction for wisdom [its starting point and its essence];
And before honor comes humility.

Proverbs 16
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1The plans and reflections of the heart belong to man,
But the [wise] answer of the tongue is from the LORD. 2All the ways of a man are clean and innocent in his own eyes [and he may see nothing wrong with his actions],
But the LORD weighs and examines the motives and intents [of the heart and knows the truth]. 3Commit your works to the LORD [submit and trust them to Him],
And your plans will succeed [if you respond to His will and guidance]. 4The LORD has made everything for its own purpose,
Even the wicked [according to their role] for the day of evil. 5Everyone who is proud and arrogant in heart is disgusting and exceedingly offensive to the LORD;
Be assured he will not go unpunished. 6By mercy and lovingkindness and truth [not superficial ritual] wickedness is cleansed from the heart,
And by the fear of the LORD one avoids evil. 7When a man’s ways please the LORD,
He makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. 8Better is a little with righteousness
Than great income [gained] with injustice. 9A man’s mind plans his way [as he journeys through life],
But the LORD directs his steps and establishes them. 10A divine decision [given by God] is on the lips of the king [as His representative];
His mouth should not be unfaithful or unjust in judgment. 11A just balance and [honest] scales are the LORD’S;
All the weights of the bag are His concern [established by His eternal principles]. 12It is repulsive [to God and man] for kings to behave wickedly,
For a throne is established on righteousness (right standing with God). 13Righteous lips are the delight of kings,
And he who speaks right is loved. 14The wrath of a king is like a messenger of death,
But a wise man will appease it. 15In the light of the king’s face is life,
And his favor is like a cloud bringing the spring rain. 16How much better it is to get wisdom than gold!
And to get understanding is to be chosen above silver. 17The highway of the upright turns away and departs from evil;
He who guards his way protects his life (soul). 18Pride goes before destruction,
And a haughty spirit before a fall. 19It is better to be humble in spirit with the lowly
Than to divide the spoil with the proud (haughty, arrogant). 20He who pays attention to the word [of God] will find good,
And blessed (happy, prosperous, to be admired) is he who trusts [confidently] in the LORD. 21The wise in heart will be called understanding,
And sweet speech increases persuasiveness and learning [in both speaker and listener]. 22Understanding (spiritual insight) is a [refreshing and boundless] wellspring of life to those who have it,
But to give instruction and correction to fools is foolishness. 23The heart of the wise instructs his mouth [in wisdom]
And adds persuasiveness to his lips. 24Pleasant words are like a honeycomb,
Sweet and delightful to the soul and healing to the body. 25There is a way which seems right to a man and appears straight before him,
But its end is the way of death. 26The appetite of a worker works for him,
For his hunger urges him on. 27A worthless man devises and digs up evil,
And the words on his lips are like a scorching fire. 28A perverse man spreads strife,
And one who gossips separates intimate friends. 29A violent and exceedingly covetous man entices his neighbor [to sin],
And leads him in a way that is not good. 30He who [slyly] winks his eyes does so to plot perverse things;
And he who compresses his lips [as if in a secret signal] brings evil to pass. 31The silver-haired head is a crown of splendor and glory;
It is found in the way of righteousness. 32He who is slow to anger is better and more honorable than the mighty [soldier],
And he who rules and controls his own spirit, than he who captures a city. 33The lot is cast into the lap,
But its every decision is from the LORD.

Proverbs 17
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1Better is a dry morsel [of food served] with quietness and peace
Than a house full of feasting [served] with strife and contention. 2A wise servant will rule over the [unworthy] son who acts shamefully and brings disgrace [to the family]
And [the worthy servant] will share in the inheritance among the brothers. 3The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold,
But the LORD tests hearts. 4An evildoer listens closely to wicked lips;
And a liar pays attention to a destructive and malicious tongue. 5Whoever mocks the poor taunts his Maker,
And he who rejoices at [another’s] disaster will not go unpunished. 6Grandchildren are the crown of aged men,
And the glory of children is their fathers [who live godly lives]. 7Excellent speech does not benefit a fool [who is spiritually blind],
Much less do lying lips benefit a prince. 8A bribe is like a bright, precious stone in the eyes of its owner;
Wherever he turns, he prospers. 9He who covers and forgives an offense seeks love,
But he who repeats or gossips about a matter separates intimate friends. 10A reprimand goes deeper into one who has understanding and a teachable spirit
Than a hundred lashes into a fool. 11A rebellious man seeks only evil;
Therefore a cruel messenger will be sent against him. 12Let a man meet a [ferocious] bear robbed of her cubs
Rather than the [angry, narcissistic] fool in his folly. 13Whoever returns evil for good,
Evil will not depart from his house. 14The beginning of strife is like letting out water [as from a small break in a dam; first it trickles and then it gushes];
Therefore abandon the quarrel before it breaks out and tempers explode. 15He who justifies the wicked, and he who condemns the righteous
Are both repulsive to the LORD. 16Why is there money in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom,
When he has no common sense or even a heart for it? 17A friend loves at all times,
And a brother is born for adversity. 18A man lacking common sense gives a pledge
And becomes guarantor [for the debt of another] in the presence of his neighbor. 19He who loves transgression loves strife and is quarrelsome;
He who [proudly] raises his gate seeks destruction [because of his arrogant pride]. 20He who has a crooked mind finds no good,
And he who is perverted in his language falls into evil. 21He who becomes the parent of a fool [who is spiritually blind] does so to his sorrow,
And the father of a fool [who is spiritually blind] has no joy. 22A happy heart is good medicine and a joyful mind causes healing,
But a broken spirit dries up the bones. 23A wicked man receives a bribe from the [hidden] pocket
To pervert the ways of justice. 24[Skillful and godly] wisdom is in the presence of a person of understanding [and he recognizes it],
But the eyes of a [thickheaded] fool are on the ends of the earth. 25A foolish son is a grief and anguish to his father
And bitterness to her who gave birth to him. 26It is also not good to fine the righteous,
Nor to strike the noble for their uprightness. 27He who has knowledge restrains and is careful with his words,
And a man of understanding and wisdom has a cool spirit (self-control, an even temper). 28Even a [callous, arrogant] fool, when he keeps silent, is considered wise;
When he closes his lips he is regarded as sensible (prudent, discreet) and a man of understanding.

Proverbs 18
Contrast The Upright And The Wicked
1He who [willfully] separates himself [from God and man] seeks his own desire,
He quarrels against all sound wisdom. 2A [closed-minded] fool does not delight in understanding,
But only in revealing his personal opinions [unwittingly displaying his self-indulgence and his stupidity]. 3When the wicked man comes [to the depth of evil], contempt [of all that is pure and good] also comes,
And with inner baseness (dishonor) comes outer shame (scorn). 4The words of a man’s mouth are like deep waters [copious and difficult to fathom];
The fountain of [mature, godly] wisdom is like a bubbling stream [sparkling, fresh, pure, and life-giving]. 5To show respect to the wicked person is not good,
Nor to push aside and deprive the righteous of justice. 6A fool’s lips bring contention and strife,
And his mouth invites a beating. 7A fool’s mouth is his ruin,
And his lips are the snare of his soul. 8The words of a whisperer (gossip) are like dainty morsels [to be greedily eaten];
They go down into the innermost chambers of the body [to be remembered and mused upon]. 9He who is careless in his work
Is a brother to him who destroys. 10The name of the LORD is a strong tower;
The righteous runs to it and is safe and set on high [far above evil]. 11The rich man’s wealth is his strong city,
And like a high wall [of protection] in his own imagination and conceit. 12Before disaster the heart of a man is haughty and filled with self-importance,
But humility comes before honor. 13He who answers before he hears [the facts]—
It is folly and shame to him. 14The spirit of a man sustains him in sickness,
But as for a broken spirit, who can bear it? 15The mind of the prudent [always] acquires knowledge,
And the ear of the wise [always] seeks knowledge. 16A man’s gift [given in love or courtesy] makes room for him
And brings him before great men. 17The first one to plead his case seems right,
Until another comes and cross-examines him. 18To cast lots puts an end to quarrels
And decides between powerful contenders. 19A brother offended is harder to win over than a fortified city,
And contentions [separating families] are like the bars of a castle. 20A man’s stomach will be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth;
He will be satisfied with the consequence of his words. 21Death and life are in the power of the tongue,
And those who love it and indulge it will eat its fruit and bear the consequences of their words. 22He who finds a [true and faithful] wife finds a good thing
And obtains favor and approval from the LORD. 23The poor man pleads,
But the rich man answers roughly. 24The man of too many friends [chosen indiscriminately] will be broken in pieces and come to ruin,
But there is a [true, loving] friend who [is reliable and] sticks closer than a brother.

Proverbs 19
On Life And Conduct
1Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity
Than a [rich] man who is twisted in his speech and is a [shortsighted] fool. 2Also it is not good for a person to be without knowledge,
And he who hurries with his feet [acting impulsively and proceeding without caution or analyzing the consequences] sins (misses the mark). 3The foolishness of man undermines his way [ruining whatever he undertakes];
Then his heart is resentful and rages against the LORD [for, being a fool, he blames the LORD instead of himself]. 4Wealth makes many friends,
But a poor man is separated from his friend. 5A false witness will not go unpunished,
And he who breathes out lies will not escape. 6Many will seek the favor of a generous and noble man,
And everyone is a friend to him who gives gifts. 7All the brothers of a poor man hate him;
How much more do his friends abandon him!
He pursues them with words, but they are gone. 8He who gains wisdom and good sense loves (preserves) his own soul;
He who keeps understanding will find good and prosper. 9A false witness will not go unpunished,
And he who breathes lies will perish. 10Luxury is not fitting for a fool;
Much less for a slave to rule over princes. 11Good sense and discretion make a man slow to anger,
And it is his honor and glory to overlook a transgression or an offense [without seeking revenge and harboring resentment]. 12The king’s wrath terrifies like the roaring of a lion,
But his favor is as [refreshing and nourishing as] dew on the grass. 13A foolish (ungodly) son is destruction to his father,
And the contentions of a [quarrelsome] wife are like a constant dripping [of water]. 14House and wealth are the inheritance from fathers,
But a wise, understanding, and sensible wife is [a gift and blessing] from the LORD. 15Laziness casts one into a deep sleep [unmindful of lost opportunity],
And the idle person will suffer hunger. 16He who keeps and obeys the commandment [of the LORD] keeps (guards) his own life,
But he who is careless of his ways and conduct will die. 17He who is gracious and lends a hand to the poor lends to the LORD,
And the LORD will repay him for his good deed. 18Discipline and teach your son while there is hope,
And do not [indulge your anger or resentment by imposing inappropriate punishment nor] desire his destruction. 19A man of great anger will bear the penalty [for his quick temper and lack of self-control];
For if you rescue him [and do not let him learn from the consequences of his action], you will only have to rescue him over and over again. 20Listen to counsel, receive instruction, and accept correction,
That you may be wise in the time to come. 21Many plans are in a man’s mind,
But it is the LORD’S purpose for him that will stand (be carried out). 22That which is desirable in a man is his loyalty and unfailing love,
But it is better to be a poor man than a [wealthy] liar. 23The fear of the LORD leads to life,
So that one may sleep satisfied, untouched by evil. 24The lazy man buries his hand in the [food] dish,
But will not even bring it to his mouth again. 25Strike a scoffer [for refusing to learn], and the naive may [be warned and] become prudent;
Reprimand one who has understanding and a teachable spirit, and he will gain knowledge and insight. 26He who assaults his father and chases away his mother
Is a son who brings shame and disgrace. 27Cease listening, my son, to instruction and discipline
And you will stray from the words of knowledge. 28A wicked and worthless witness mocks justice,
And the mouth of the wicked spreads iniquity. 29Judgments are prepared for scoffers,
And beatings for the backs of [thickheaded] fools.

Proverbs 20
On Life And Conduct
1Wine is a mocker, strong drink a riotous brawler;
And whoever is intoxicated by it is not wise. 2The terror of a king is like the roaring of a lion;
Whoever provokes him to anger forfeits his own life. 3It is an honor for a man to keep away from strife [by handling situations with thoughtful foresight],
But any fool will [start a] quarrel [without regard for the consequences]. 4The lazy man does not plow when the winter [planting] season arrives;
So he begs at the [next] harvest and has nothing [to reap]. 5A plan (motive, wise counsel) in the heart of a man is like water in a deep well,
But a man of understanding draws it out. 6Many a man proclaims his own loyalty and goodness,
But who can find a faithful and trustworthy man? 7The righteous man who walks in integrity and lives life in accord with his [godly] beliefs—
How blessed [happy and spiritually secure] are his children after him [who have his example to follow]. 8A [discerning] king who sits on the throne of judgment
Sifts all evil [like chaff] with his eyes [and cannot be easily fooled]. 9Who can say, “I have cleansed my heart,
I am pure from my sin?” 10Differing weights [one for buying and another for selling] and differing measures,
Both of them are detestable and offensive to the LORD. 11Even a boy is known and distinguished by his acts,
Whether his conduct is pure and right. 12The hearing ear and the seeing eye,
The [omnipotent] LORD has made both of them. 13Do not love [excessive] sleep, or you will become poor;
Open your eyes [so that you can do your work] and you will be satisfied with bread. 14“It is [almost] worthless, it is [almost] worthless,” says the buyer [as he negotiates the price];
But when he goes his way, then he boasts [about his bargain]. 15There is gold, and an abundance of pearls,
But the lips of knowledge are a vessel of preciousness [the most precious of all]. 16[The judge tells the creditor], “Take the clothes of one who is surety for a stranger;
And hold him in pledge [when he guarantees a loan] for foreigners.” 17Food gained by deceit is sweet to a man,
But afterward his mouth will be filled with gravel [just as sin may be sweet at first, but later its consequences bring despair]. 18Plans are established by counsel;
So make war [only] with wise guidance. 19He who goes about as a gossip reveals secrets;
Therefore do not associate with a gossip [who talks freely or flatters]. 20Whoever curses his father or his mother,
His lamp [of life] will be extinguished in time of darkness. 21An inheritance hastily gained [by greedy, unjust means] at the beginning
Will not be blessed in the end. 22Do not say, “I will repay evil”;
Wait [expectantly] for the LORD, and He will rescue and save you. 23Differing weights are detestable and offensive to the LORD,
And fraudulent scales are not good. 24Man’s steps are ordered and ordained by the LORD.
How then can a man [fully] understand his way? 25It is a trap for a man to [speak a vow of consecration and] say rashly, “It is holy!”
And [not until] afterward consider [whether he can fulfill it]. 26A wise king sifts out the wicked [from among the good]
And drives the [threshing] wheel over them [to separate the chaff from the grain]. 27The spirit (conscience) of man is the lamp of the LORD,
Searching and examining all the innermost parts of his being. 28Loyalty and mercy, truth and faithfulness, protect the king,
And he upholds his throne by lovingkindness. 29The glory of young men is their [physical] strength,
And the honor of aged men is their gray head [representing wisdom and experience]. 30Blows that wound cleanse away evil,
And strokes reach to the innermost parts.

Proverbs 21
On Life And Conduct
1The king’s heart is like channels of water in the hand of the LORD;
He turns it whichever way He wishes. 2Every man’s way is right in his own eyes,
But the LORD weighs and examines the hearts [of people and their motives]. 3To do righteousness and justice
Is more acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice [for wrongs repeatedly committed]. 4Haughty and arrogant eyes and a proud heart,
The lamp of the wicked [their self-centered pride], is sin [in the eyes of God]. 5The plans of the diligent lead surely to abundance and advantage,
But everyone who acts in haste comes surely to poverty. 6Acquiring treasures by a lying tongue
Is a fleeting vapor, the seeking and pursuit of death. 7The violence of the wicked will [return to them and] drag them away [like fish caught in a net],
Because they refuse to act with justice. 8The way of the guilty is [exceedingly] crooked,
But as for the pure, his conduct is upright. 9It is better to live in a corner of the housetop [on the flat roof, exposed to the weather]
Than in a house shared with a quarrelsome (contentious) woman. 10The soul of the wicked desires evil [like an addictive substance];
His neighbor finds no compassion in his eyes. 11When the scoffer is punished, the naive [observes the lesson and] becomes wise;
But when the wise and teachable person is instructed, he receives knowledge. 12The righteous one keeps an eye on the house of the wicked—
How the wicked are cast down to ruin. 13Whoever shuts his ears at the cry of the poor
Will cry out himself and not be answered. 14A gift in secret subdues anger,
And a bribe [hidden] in the pocket, strong wrath. 15When justice is done, it is a joy to the righteous (the upright, the one in right standing with God),
But to the evildoers it is disaster. 16A man who wanders from the way of understanding (godly wisdom)
Will remain in the assembly of the dead. 17He who loves [only selfish] pleasure will become a poor man;
He who loves and is devoted to wine and [olive] oil will not become rich. 18The wicked become a ransom for the righteous,
And the treacherous in the place of the upright [for they fall into their own traps]. 19It is better to dwell in a desert land
Than with a contentious and troublesome woman. 20There is precious treasure and oil in the house of the wise [who prepare for the future],
But a short-sighted and foolish man swallows it up and wastes it. 21He who earnestly seeks righteousness and loyalty
Finds life, righteousness, and honor. 22A wise man scales the city [walls] of the mighty
And brings down the stronghold in which they trust. 23He who guards his mouth and his tongue
Guards himself from troubles. 24“Proud,” “Haughty,” “Scoffer,” are his names
Who acts with overbearing and insolent pride. 25The desire of the lazy kills him,
For his hands refuse to labor; 26He craves all the day long [and does no work],
But the righteous [willingly] gives and does not withhold [what he has]. 27The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable and offensive [to the LORD].
How much more [unacceptable and insulting can it be] when he brings it with evil intention? 28A false witness will perish,
But a man who listens to the truth will speak forever and go unchallenged. 29A wicked man puts on a bold face,
But as for the upright, he considers, directs, and establishes his way [with the confidence of integrity]. 30There is no [human] wisdom or understanding
Or counsel [that can prevail] against the LORD. 31The horse is prepared for the day of battle,
But deliverance and victory belong to the LORD.

Proverbs 22
On Life And Conduct
1A good name [earned by honorable behavior, godly wisdom, moral courage, and personal integrity] is more desirable than great riches;
And favor is better than silver and gold. 2The rich and poor have a common bond;
The LORD is the Maker of them all. 3A prudent and far-sighted person sees the evil [of sin] and hides himself [from it],
But the naive continue on and are punished [by suffering the consequences of sin]. 4The reward of humility [that is, having a realistic view of one’s importance] and the [reverent, worshipful] fear of the LORD
Is riches, honor, and life. 5Thorns and snares are in the way of the obstinate [for their lack of honor and their wrong-doing traps them];
He who guards himself [with godly wisdom] will be far from them and avoid the consequences they suffer. 6Train up a child in the way he should go [teaching him to seek God’s wisdom and will for his abilities and talents],
Even when he is old he will not depart from it. 7The rich rules over the poor,
And the borrower is servant to the lender. 8He who sows injustice will reap [a harvest of] trouble,
And the rod of his wrath [with which he oppresses others] will fail. 9He who is generous will be blessed,
For he gives some of his food to the poor. 10Drive out the scoffer, and contention will go away;
Even strife and dishonor will cease. 11He who loves purity of heart
And whose speech is gracious will have the king as his friend. 12The eyes of the LORD keep guard over knowledge and the one who has it,
But He overthrows the words of the treacherous. 13The lazy one [manufactures excuses and] says, “There is a lion outside!
I will be killed in the streets [if I go out to work]!” 14The mouth of an immoral woman is a deep pit [deep and inescapable];
He who is cursed by the LORD [because of his adulterous sin] will fall into it. 15Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child;
The rod of discipline [correction administered with godly wisdom and lovingkindness] will remove it far from him. 16He who oppresses or exploits the poor to get more for himself
Or who gives to the rich [to gain influence and favor], will only come to poverty. 17Listen carefully and hear the words of the wise,
And apply your mind to my knowledge; 18For it will be pleasant if you keep them in mind [incorporating them as guiding principles];
Let them be ready on your lips [to guide and strengthen yourself and others]. 19So that your trust and reliance and confidence may be in the LORD,
I have taught these things to you today, even to you. 20Have I not written to you excellent things
In counsels and knowledge, 21To let you know the certainty of the words of truth,
That you may give a correct answer to him who sent you? 22Do not rob the poor because he is poor [and defenseless],
Nor crush the afflicted [by legal proceedings] at the gate [where the city court is held], 23For the LORD will plead their case
And take the life of those who rob them. 24Do not even associate with a man given to angry outbursts;
Or go [along] with a hot-tempered man, 25Or you will learn his [undisciplined] ways
And get yourself trapped [in a situation from which it is hard to escape]. 26Do not be among those who give pledges [involving themselves in others’ finances],
Or among those who become guarantors for others’ debts. 27If you have nothing with which to pay [another’s debt when he defaults],
Why should his creditor take your bed from under you? 28Do not move the ancient landmark [at the boundary of the property]
Which your fathers have set. 29Do you see a man skillful and experienced in his work?
He will stand [in honor] before kings;
He will not stand before obscure men.

Proverbs 23
On Life And Conduct
1When you sit down to dine with a ruler,
Consider carefully what is [set] before you; 2For you will put a knife to your throat
If you are a man of great appetite. 3Do not desire his delicacies,
For it is deceptive food [offered to you with questionable motives]. 4Do not weary yourself [with the overwhelming desire] to gain wealth;
Cease from your own understanding of it. 5When you set your eyes on wealth, it is [suddenly] gone.
For wealth certainly makes itself wings
Like an eagle that flies to the heavens. 6Do not eat the bread of a selfish man,
Or desire his delicacies; 7For as he thinks in his heart, so is he [in behavior—one who manipulates].
He says to you, “Eat and drink,”
Yet his heart is not with you [but it is begrudging the cost]. 8The morsel which you have eaten you will vomit up,
And you will waste your compliments. 9Do not speak in the ears of a fool,
For he will despise the [godly] wisdom of your words. 10Do not move the ancient landmark [at the boundary of the property]
And do not go into the fields of the fatherless [to take what is theirs], 11For their Redeemer is strong and mighty;
He will plead their case against you. 12Apply your heart to discipline
And your ears to words of knowledge. 13Do not withhold discipline from the child;
If you swat him with a reed-like rod [applied with godly wisdom], he will not die. 14You shall swat him with the reed-like rod
And rescue his life from Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead). 15My son, if your heart is wise,
My heart will also be glad; 16Yes, my heart will rejoice
When your lips speak right things. 17Do not let your heart envy sinners [who live godless lives and have no hope of salvation],
But [continue to] live in the [reverent, worshipful] fear of the LORD day by day. 18Surely there is a future [and a reward],
And your hope and expectation will not be cut off. 19Listen, my son, and be wise,
And direct your heart in the way [of the LORD]. 20Do not associate with heavy drinkers of wine,
Or with gluttonous eaters of meat, 21For the heavy drinker and the glutton will come to poverty,
And the drowsiness [of overindulgence] will clothe one with rags. 22Listen to your father, who sired you,
And do not despise your mother when she is old. 23Buy truth, and do not sell it;
Get wisdom and instruction and understanding. 24The father of the righteous will greatly rejoice,
And he who sires a wise child will have joy in him. 25Let your father and your mother be glad,
And let her who gave birth to you rejoice [in your wise and godly choices]. 26My son, give me your heart
And let your eyes delight in my ways, 27For a prostitute is a deep pit,
And an immoral woman is a narrow well. 28She lurks and lies in wait like a robber [who waits for prey],
And she increases the faithless among men. 29Who has woe? Who has sorrow?
Who has strife? Who has complaining?
Who has wounds without cause?
Whose eyes are red and dim? 30Those who linger long over wine,
Those who go to taste mixed wine. 31Do not look at wine when it is red,
When it sparkles in the glass,
When it goes down smoothly. 32At the last it bites like a serpent
And stings like a viper. 33Your [drunken] eyes will see strange things
And your mind will utter perverse things [untrue things, twisted things]. 34And you will be [as unsteady] as one who lies down in the middle of the sea,
And [as vulnerable to disaster] as one who lies down on the top of a ship’s mast, saying, 35“They struck me, but I was not hurt!
They beat me, but I did not feel it!
When will I wake up?
I will seek more wine.”

Proverbs 24
Precepts And Warnings
1Do not be envious of evil men,
Nor desire to be with them; 2For their minds plot violence,
And their lips talk of trouble [for the innocent]. 3Through [skillful and godly] wisdom a house [a life, a home, a family] is built,
And by understanding it is established [on a sound and good foundation], 4And by knowledge its rooms are filled
With all precious and pleasant riches. 5A wise man is strong,
And a man of knowledge strengthens his power; 6For by wise guidance you can wage your war,
And in an abundance of [wise] counselors there is victory and safety. 7Wisdom is too exalted for a [hardened, arrogant] fool;
He does not open his mouth in the gate [where the city’s rulers sit in judgment]. 8He who plans to do evil
Will be called a schemer or deviser of evil. 9The devising of folly is sin,
And the scoffer is repulsive to men. 10If you are slack (careless) in the day of distress,
Your strength is limited. 11Rescue those who are being taken away to death,
And those who stagger to the slaughter, Oh hold them back [from their doom]! 12If you [claim ignorance and] say, “See, we did not know this,”
Does He not consider it who weighs and examines the hearts and their motives?
And does He not know it who guards your life and keeps your soul?
And will He not repay [you and] every man according to his works? 13My son, eat honey, because it is good,
And the drippings of the honeycomb are sweet to your taste. 14Know that [skillful and godly] wisdom is [so very good] for your life and soul;
If you find wisdom, then there will be a future and a reward,
And your hope and expectation will not be cut off. 15Do not lie in wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the righteous;
Do not destroy his resting place; 16For a righteous man falls seven times, and rises again,
But the wicked stumble in time of disaster and collapse. 17Do not rejoice and gloat when your enemy falls,
And do not let your heart be glad [in self-righteousness] when he stumbles, 18Or the LORD will see your gloating and be displeased,
And turn His anger away from your enemy. 19Do not get upset because of evildoers,
Or be envious of the wicked, 20For there will be no future for the evil man;
The lamp of the wicked will be put out. 21My son, fear the LORD and the king;
And do not associate with those who are given to change [of allegiance, and are revolutionary], 22For their tragedy will rise suddenly,
And who knows the punishment that both [the LORD and the king] will bring on the rebellious? 23These also are sayings of the wise:
To show partiality in judgment is not good. 24He who says to the wicked, “You are righteous,”
Peoples will curse him, nations will denounce him; 25But to those [honorable judges] who rebuke the wicked, it will go well with them and they will find delight,
And a good blessing will come upon them. 26He kisses the lips [and wins the hearts of people]
Who gives a right and straightforward answer. 27Prepare your work outside
And get it ready for yourself in the field;
Afterward build your house and establish a home. 28Do not be a witness against your neighbor without cause,
And do not deceive with your lips [speak neither lies nor half-truths]. 29Do not say, “I will do to him as he has done to me;
I will pay the man back for his deed.” 30I went by the field of the lazy man,
And by the vineyard of the man lacking understanding and common sense; 31And, behold, it was all overgrown with thorns,
And nettles were covering its surface,
And its stone wall was broken down. 32When I saw, I considered it well;
I looked and received instruction. 33“Yet a little sleep, a little slumber,
A little folding of the hands to rest [and daydream],” 34Then your poverty will come as a robber,
And your want like an armed man.

Proverbs 25
Similitudes, Instructions
1These are also the proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied: 2It is the glory of God to conceal a matter,
But the glory of kings is to search out a matter. 3As the heavens for height and the earth for depth,
So the hearts and minds of kings are unsearchable. 4Take away the dross from the silver,
And there comes out [the pure metal for] a vessel for the silversmith [to shape]. 5Take away the wicked from before the king,
And his throne will be established in righteousness. 6Do not be boastfully ambitious and claim honor in the presence of the king,
And do not stand in the place of great men; 7For it is better that it be said to you, “Come up here,”
Than for you to be placed lower in the presence of the prince,
Whom your eyes have seen. 8Do not rush out to argue your case [before magistrates or judges];
Otherwise what will you do in the end [when your case is lost and]
When your neighbor (opponent) humiliates you? 9Argue your case with your neighbor himself [before you go to court];
And do not reveal another’s secret, 10Or he who hears it will shame you
And the rumor about you [and your action in court] will have no end. 11Like apples of gold in settings of silver
Is a word spoken at the right time. 12Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold
Is a wise reprover to an ear that listens and learns. 13Like the cold of snow [brought from the mountains] in the time of harvest,
So is a faithful messenger to those who send him;
For he refreshes the life of his masters. 14Like clouds and wind without rain
Is a man who boasts falsely of gifts [he does not give]. 15By patience and a calm spirit a ruler may be persuaded,
And a soft and gentle tongue breaks the bone [of resistance]. 16Have you found [pleasure sweet like] honey? Eat only as much as you need,
Otherwise, being filled excessively, you vomit it. 17Let your foot seldom be in your neighbor’s house,
Or he will become tired of you and hate you. 18Like a club and a sword and a piercing arrow
Is a man who testifies falsely against his neighbor (acquaintance). 19Like a broken tooth or an unsteady foot
Is confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble. 20Like one who takes off a garment in cold weather, or like [a reactive, useless mixture of] vinegar on soda,
Is he who [thoughtlessly] sings [joyful] songs to a heavy heart. 21If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat;
And if he is thirsty, give him water to drink; 22For in doing so, you will heap coals of fire upon his head,
And the LORD will reward you. 23The north wind brings forth rain;
And a backbiting tongue, an angry countenance. 24It is better to live in a corner of the housetop [on the flat roof, exposed to the weather]
Than in a house shared with a quarrelsome (contentious) woman. 25Like cold water to a thirsty soul,
So is good news from a distant land. 26Like a muddied fountain and a polluted spring
Is a righteous man who yields and compromises his integrity before the wicked. 27It is not good to eat much honey,
Nor is it glorious to seek one’s own glory. 28Like a city that is broken down and without walls [leaving it unprotected]
Is a man who has no self-control over his spirit [and sets himself up for trouble].

Proverbs 26
Similitudes, Instructions
1Like snow in summer and like rain in harvest,
So honor is not fitting for a [shortsighted] fool. 2Like the sparrow in her wandering, like the swallow in her flying,
So the curse without cause does not come and alight [on the undeserving]. 3A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey,
And a rod for the backs of fools [who refuse to learn]. 4Do not answer [nor pretend to agree with the frivolous comments of] a [closed-minded] fool according to his folly,
Otherwise you, even you, will be like him. 5Answer [and correct the erroneous concepts of] a fool according to his folly,
Otherwise he will be wise in his own eyes [if he thinks you agree with him]. 6He who sends a message by the hand of a fool
Cuts off his own feet (sabotages himself) and drinks the violence [it brings on himself as a consequence]. 7Like the legs which are useless to the lame,
So is a proverb in the mouth of a fool [who cannot learn from its wisdom]. 8Like one who [absurdly] binds a stone in a sling [making it impossible to throw],
So is he who [absurdly] gives honor to a fool. 9Like a thorn that goes [without being felt] into the hand of a drunken man,
So is a proverb in the mouth of a fool [who remains unaffected by its wisdom]. 10Like a [careless] archer who [shoots arrows wildly and] wounds everyone,
So is he who hires a fool or those who [by chance just] pass by. 11Like a dog that returns to his vomit
Is a fool who repeats his foolishness. 12Do you see a man [who is unteachable and] wise in his own eyes and full of self-conceit?
There is more hope for a fool than for him. 13The lazy person [who is self-indulgent and relies on lame excuses] says, “There is a lion in the road!
A lion is in the open square [and if I go outside to work I will be killed]!” 14As the door turns on its hinges,
So does the lazy person on his bed [never getting out of it]. 15The lazy person buries his hand in the dish [losing opportunity after opportunity];
It wearies him to bring it back to his mouth. 16The lazy person is wiser in his own eyes
Than seven [sensible] men who can give a discreet answer. 17Like one who grabs a dog by the ears [and is likely to be bitten]
Is he who, passing by, stops to meddle with a dispute that is none of his business. 18Like a madman who throws
Firebrands, arrows, and death, 19So is the man who deceives his neighbor (acquaintance, friend)
And then says, “Was I not joking?” 20For lack of wood the fire goes out,
And where there is no whisperer [who gossips], contention quiets down. 21Like charcoal to hot embers and wood to fire,
So is a contentious man to kindle strife. 22The words of a whisperer (gossip) are like dainty morsels [to be greedily eaten];
They go down into the innermost chambers of the body [to be remembered and mused upon]. 23Like a [common] clay vessel covered with the silver dross [making it appear silver when it has no real value]
Are burning lips [murmuring manipulative words] and a wicked heart. 24He who hates, disguises it with his lips,
But he stores up deceit in his heart. 25When he speaks graciously and kindly [to conceal his malice], do not trust him,
For seven abominations are in his heart. 26Though his hatred covers itself with guile and deceit,
His malevolence will be revealed openly before the assembly. 27Whoever digs a pit [for another man’s feet] will fall into it,
And he who rolls a stone [up a hill to do mischief], it will come back on him. 28A lying tongue hates those it wounds and crushes,
And a flattering mouth works ruin.

Proverbs 27
Warnings And Instructions
1Do not boast about tomorrow,
For you do not know what a day may bring. 2Let another praise you, and not your own mouth;
A stranger, and not your own lips. 3Stone is heavy and the sand weighty,
But a fool’s [unreasonable] wrath is heavier and more burdensome than both of them. 4Wrath is cruel and anger is an overwhelming flood,
But who is able to endure and stand before [the sin of] jealousy? 5Better is an open reprimand [of loving correction]
Than love that is hidden. 6Faithful are the wounds of a friend [who corrects out of love and concern],
But the kisses of an enemy are deceitful [because they serve his hidden agenda]. 7He who is satisfied loathes honey,
But to the hungry soul any bitter thing is sweet. 8Like a bird that wanders from her nest [with its comfort and safety],
So is a man who wanders from his home. 9Oil and perfume make the heart glad;
So does the sweetness of a friend’s counsel that comes from the heart. 10Do not abandon your own friend and your father’s friend,
And do not go to your brother’s house in the day of your disaster.
Better is a neighbor who is near than a brother who is far away. 11My son, be wise, and make my heart glad,
That I may reply to him who reproaches (reprimands, criticizes) me. 12A prudent man sees evil and hides himself and avoids it,
But the naive [who are easily misled] continue on and are punished [by suffering the consequences of sin]. 13[The judge tells the creditor,] “Take the garment of one who is surety (guarantees a loan) for a stranger;
And hold him in pledge when he is surety for an immoral woman [for it is unlikely the debt will be repaid].” 14He who blesses his neighbor with a loud voice early in the morning,
It will be counted as a curse to him [for it will either be annoying or his purpose will be suspect]. 15A constant dripping on a day of steady rain
And a contentious (quarrelsome) woman are alike; 16Whoever attempts to restrain her [criticism] might as well try to stop the wind,
And grasps oil with his right hand. 17As iron sharpens iron,
So one man sharpens [and influences] another [through discussion]. 18He who tends the fig tree will eat its fruit,
And he who faithfully protects and cares for his master will be honored. 19As in water face reflects face,
So the heart of man reflects man. 20Sheol (the place of the dead) and Abaddon (the underworld) are never satisfied;
Nor are the eyes of man ever satisfied. 21The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold [to separate the impurities of the metal],
And each is tested by the praise given to him [and his response to it, whether humble or proud]. 22Even though you pound a [hardened, arrogant] fool [who rejects wisdom] in a mortar with a pestle like grain,
Yet his foolishness will not leave him. 23Be diligent to know the condition of your flocks,
And pay attention to your herds; 24For riches are not forever,
Nor does a crown endure to all generations. 25When the grass is gone, the new growth is seen,
And herbs of the mountain are gathered in, 26The lambs will supply wool for your clothing,
And the goats will bring the price of a field. 27And there will be enough goats’ milk for your food,
For the food of your household,
And for the maintenance of your maids.

Proverbs 28
Warnings And Instructions
1The wicked flee when no one pursues them,
But the righteous are as bold as a lion. 2When a land does wrong, it has many princes,
But when the ruler is a man of understanding and knowledge, its stability endures. 3A poor man who oppresses and exploits the lowly
Is like a sweeping rain which leaves no food. 4Those who set aside the law [of God and man] praise the wicked,
But those who keep the law [of God and man] struggle with them. 5Evil men do not understand justice,
But they who long for and seek the LORD understand it fully. 6Better is the poor who walks in his integrity
Than he who is crooked and two-faced though he is rich. 7He who keeps the law [of God and man] is a wise and discerning son,
But he who is a companion of gluttons humiliates his father [and himself]. 8He who increases his wealth by interest and usury (excessive interest)
Gathers it for him who is gracious to the poor. 9He who turns his ear away from listening to the law [of God and man],
Even his prayer is repulsive [to God]. 10He who leads the upright astray on an evil path
Will himself fall into his own pit,
But the blameless will inherit good. 11The rich man [who is conceited and relies on his wealth instead of God] is wise in his own eyes,
But the poor man who has understanding [because he relies on God] is able to see through him. 12When the righteous triumph, there is great glory and celebration;
But when the wicked rise [to prominence], men hide themselves. 13He who conceals his transgressions will not prosper,
But whoever confesses and turns away from his sins will find compassion and mercy. 14Blessed and favored by God is the man who fears [sin and its consequence] at all times,
But he who hardens his heart [and is determined to sin] will fall into disaster. 15Like a roaring lion and a charging bear
Is a wicked ruler over a poor people. 16A leader who is a great oppressor lacks understanding and common sense [and his wickedness shortens his days],
But he who hates unjust gain will [be blessed and] prolong his days. 17A man who is burdened with the guilt of human blood (murder)
Will be a fugitive until death; let no one support him or give him refuge. 18He who walks blamelessly and uprightly will be kept safe,
But he who is crooked (perverse) will suddenly fall. 19He who cultivates his land will have plenty of bread,
But he who follows worthless people and frivolous pursuits will have plenty of poverty. 20A faithful (right-minded) man will abound with blessings,
But he who hurries to be rich will not go unpunished. 21To have regard for one person over another and to show favoritism is not good,
Because for a piece of bread a man will transgress. 22He who has an evil and envious eye hurries to be rich
And does not know that poverty will come upon him. 23He who [appropriately] reprimands a [wise] man will afterward find more favor
Than he who flatters with the tongue. 24He who robs his father or his mother
And says, “This is no sin,”
Is [not only a thief but also] the companion of a man who destroys. 25An arrogant and greedy man stirs up strife,
But he who trusts in the LORD will be blessed and prosper. 26He who trusts confidently in his own heart is a [dull, thickheaded] fool,
But he who walks in [skillful and godly] wisdom will be rescued. 27He who gives to the poor will never want,
But he who shuts his eyes [from their need] will have many curses. 28When the wicked rise [to power], men hide themselves;
But when the wicked perish, the [consistently] righteous increase and become great.

Proverbs 29
Warnings And Instructions
1He who hardens his neck and refuses instruction after being often reproved (corrected, criticized),
Will suddenly be broken beyond repair. 2When the righteous are in authority and become great, the people rejoice;
But when the wicked man rules, the people groan and sigh. 3A man who loves [skillful and godly] wisdom makes his father joyful,
But he who associates with prostitutes wastes his wealth. 4The king establishes (stabilizes) the land by justice,
But a man who takes bribes overthrows it. 5A man who flatters his neighbor [with smooth words intending to do harm]
Is spreading a net for his own feet. 6By his wicked plan an evil man is trapped,
But the righteous man sings and rejoices [for his plan brings good things to him]. 7The righteous man cares for the rights of the poor,
But the wicked man has no interest in such knowledge. 8Scoffers set a city afire [by stirring up trouble],
But wise men turn away anger [and restore order with their good judgment]. 9If a wise man has a controversy with a foolish and arrogant man,
The foolish man [ignores logic and fairness and] only rages or laughs, and there is no peace (rest, agreement). 10The bloodthirsty hate the blameless [because of his integrity],
But the upright are concerned for his life. 11A [shortsighted] fool always loses his temper and displays his anger,
But a wise man [uses self-control and] holds it back. 12If a ruler pays attention to lies [and encourages corruption],
All his officials will become wicked. 13The poor man and the oppressor have this in common:
The LORD gives light to the eyes of both. 14If a king faithfully and truthfully judges the poor,
His throne shall be established forever. 15The rod and reproof (godly instruction) give wisdom,
But a child who gets his own way brings shame to his mother. 16When the wicked are in authority, transgression increases,
But the righteous will see the downfall of the wicked. 17Correct your son, and he will give you comfort;
Yes, he will delight your soul. 18Where there is no vision [no revelation of God and His word], the people are unrestrained;
But happy and blessed is he who keeps the law [of God]. 19A servant will not be corrected by words alone;
For though he understands, he will not respond [nor pay attention]. 20Do you see a [conceited] man who speaks quickly [offering his opinions or answering without thinking]?
There is more hope for a [thickheaded] fool than for him. 21He who pampers his slave from childhood
Will find him to be a son in the end. 22An angry man stirs up strife,
And a hot-tempered and undisciplined man commits many transgressions. 23A man’s pride and sense of self-importance will bring him down,
But he who has a humble spirit will obtain honor. 24Whoever is partner with a thief hates his own life;
He hears the curse [when swearing an oath to testify], but discloses nothing [and commits perjury by omission]. 25The fear of man brings a snare,
But whoever trusts in and puts his confidence in the LORD will be exalted and safe. 26Many seek the ruler’s favor,
But justice for man comes from the LORD. 27An unjust man is repulsive to the righteous,
And he who is upright in the way [of the LORD] is repulsive to the wicked.

Proverbs 30
The Words Of Agur
1The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, the oracle:

The man says to Ithiel, to Ithiel and to Ucal: 2Surely I am more brutish and stupid than any man,
And I do not have the understanding of a man [for I do not know what I do not know]. 3I have not learned [skillful and godly] wisdom,
Nor do I have knowledge of the Holy One [who is the source of wisdom]. 4Who has ascended into heaven and descended?
Who has gathered the wind in His fists?
Who has bound the waters in His garment?
Who has established all the ends of the earth?
What is His name, and what is His Son’s name?
Certainly you know! 5Every word of God is tested and refined [like silver];
He is a shield to those who trust and take refuge in Him. 6Do not add to His words,
Or He will reprove you, and you will be found a liar. 7Two things I have asked of You;
Do not deny them to me before I die: 8Keep deception and lies far from me;
Give me neither poverty nor riches;
Feed me with the food that is my portion, 9So that I will not be full and deny You and say, “Who is the LORD?”
Or that I will not be poor and steal,
And so profane the name of my God. 10Do not slander or malign a servant before his master [stay out of another’s personal life],
Or he will curse you [for your interference], and you will be found guilty. 11There is a generation (class of people) that curses its father
And does not bless its mother. 12There is a generation (class of people) that is pure in its own eyes,
Yet is not washed from its filthiness. 13There is a generation (class of people)—oh, how lofty are their eyes!
And their eyelids are raised in arrogance. 14There is a generation (class of people) whose teeth are like swords
And whose jaw teeth are like knives,
To devour the afflicted from the earth
And the needy from among men. 15The leech has two daughters,
“Give, give!”
There are three things that are never satisfied,
Four that do not say, “It is enough”: 16Sheol, and the barren womb,
Earth that is never satisfied with water,
And fire that never says, “It is enough.” 17The eye that mocks a father
And scorns a mother,
The ravens of the valley will pick it out,
And the young vultures will devour it. 18There are three things which are too astounding and unexpectedly wonderful for me,
Four which I do not understand: 19The way of an eagle in the air,
The way of a serpent on a rock,
The way of a ship in the middle of the sea,
And the way of a man with a maid. 20This is the way of an adulterous woman:
She eats and wipes her mouth
And says, “I have done no wrong.” 21Under three things the earth is disquieted and quakes,
And under four it cannot bear up: 22Under a servant when he reigns,
Under a [spiritually blind] fool when he is filled with food, 23Under an unloved woman when she gets married,
And under a maidservant when she supplants her mistress. 24There are four things that are small on the earth,
But they are exceedingly wise: 25The ants are not a strong people,
Yet they prepare their food in the summer; 26The shephanim are not a mighty folk,
Yet they make their houses in the rocks; 27The locusts have no king,
Yet all of them go out in groups; 28You may grasp the lizard with your hands,
Yet it is in kings’ palaces. 29There are three things which are stately in step,
Even four which are stately in their stride: 30The lion, which is mighty among beasts
And does not turn back before any; 31The strutting rooster, the male goat also,
And the king when his army is with him. 32If you have foolishly exalted yourself,
Or if you have plotted evil, put your hand on your mouth. 33Surely the churning of milk produces butter,
And wringing the nose produces blood;
So the churning of anger produces strife.

Proverbs 31
The Words Of Lemuel
1The words of King Lemuel, the oracle, which his mother taught him: 2What, O my son?
And what, O son of my womb?
And what [shall I advise you], O son of my vows? 3Do not give your [generative] strength to women [neither foreign wives in marriages of alliances, nor concubines],
Nor your ways to that which destroys kings. 4It is not for kings, O Lemuel,
It is not for kings to drink wine,
Or for rulers to desire strong drink, 5Otherwise they drink and forget the law and its decrees,
And pervert the rights and justice of all the afflicted. 6Give strong drink [as medicine] to him who is ready to pass away,
And wine to him whose life is bitter. 7Let him drink and forget his poverty
And no longer remember his trouble. 8Open your mouth for the mute,
For the rights of all who are unfortunate and defenseless; 9Open your mouth, judge righteously,
And administer justice for the afflicted and needy. Description of a Worthy Woman 10An excellent woman [one who is spiritual, capable, intelligent, and virtuous], who is he who can find her?
Her value is more precious than jewels and her worth is far above rubies or pearls. 11The heart of her husband trusts in her [with secure confidence],
And he will have no lack of gain. 12She comforts, encourages, and does him only good and not evil
All the days of her life. 13She looks for wool and flax
And works with willing hands in delight. 14She is like the merchant ships [abounding with treasure];
She brings her [household’s] food from far away. 15She rises also while it is still night
And gives food to her household
And assigns tasks to her maids. 16She considers a field before she buys or accepts it [expanding her business prudently];
With her profits she plants fruitful vines in her vineyard. 17She equips herself with strength [spiritual, mental, and physical fitness for her God-given task]
And makes her arms strong. 18She sees that her gain is good;
Her lamp does not go out, but it burns continually through the night [she is prepared for whatever lies ahead]. 19She stretches out her hands to the distaff,
And her hands hold the spindle [as she spins wool into thread for clothing]. 20She opens and extends her hand to the poor,
And she reaches out her filled hands to the needy. 21She does not fear the snow for her household,
For all in her household are clothed in [expensive] scarlet [wool]. 22She makes for herself coverlets, cushions, and rugs of tapestry.
Her clothing is linen, pure and fine, and purple [wool]. 23Her husband is known in the [city’s] gates,
When he sits among the elders of the land. 24She makes [fine] linen garments and sells them;
And supplies sashes to the merchants. 25Strength and dignity are her clothing and her position is strong and secure;
And she smiles at the future [knowing that she and her family are prepared]. 26She opens her mouth in [skillful and godly] wisdom,
And the teaching of kindness is on her tongue [giving counsel and instruction]. 27She looks well to how things go in her household,
And does not eat the bread of idleness. 28Her children rise up and call her blessed (happy, prosperous, to be admired);
Her husband also, and he praises her, saying, 29“Many daughters have done nobly, and well [with the strength of character that is steadfast in goodness],
But you excel them all.” 30Charm and grace are deceptive, and [superficial] beauty is vain,
But a woman who fears the LORD [reverently worshiping, obeying, serving, and trusting Him with awe-filled respect], she shall be praised. 31Give her of the product of her hands,
And let her own works praise her in the gates [of the city].

Ecclesiastes 1
The Futility Of All Endeavors
1The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem. 2“Vanity of vanities,” says the Preacher.
“Vanity of vanities! All [that is done without God’s guidance] is vanity [futile, meaningless—a wisp of smoke, a vapor that vanishes, merely chasing the wind].” 3What advantage does man have from all his work
Which he does under the sun (while earthbound)? 4One generation goes and another generation comes,
But the earth remains forever. 5Also, the sun rises and the sun sets;
And hurries to the place where it rises again. 6The wind blows toward the south,
Then circles toward the north;
The wind circles and swirls endlessly,
And on its circular course the wind returns. 7All the rivers flow into the sea,
Yet the sea is not full.
To the place where the rivers flow,
There they flow again. 8All things are wearisome and all words are frail;
Man cannot express it.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing,
Nor is the ear filled with hearing. 9That which has been is that which will be [again],
And that which has been done is that which will be done again.
So there is nothing new under the sun. 10Is there anything of which it can be said,
“See this, it is new”?
It has already existed for [the vast] ages [of time recorded or unrecorded]
Which were before us. 11There is no remembrance of earlier things,
Nor also of the later things that are to come;
There will be for them no remembrance
By generations who will come after them.
The Futility of Wisdom 12I, the Preacher, have been king over Israel in Jerusalem. 13And I set my mind to seek and explore by [man’s] wisdom all [human activity] that has been done under heaven. It is a miserable business and a burdensome task which God has given the sons of men with which to be busy and distressed. 14I have seen all the works which have been done under the sun, and behold, all is vanity, a futile grasping and chasing after the wind. 15What is crooked cannot be straightened and what is defective and lacking cannot be counted.
16I spoke with my heart, saying, “Behold, I have acquired great [human] wisdom and experience, more than all who were over Jerusalem before me; and my mind has observed a wealth of [moral] wisdom and [scientific] knowledge.” 17And I set my mind to know [practical] wisdom and to discern [the character of] madness and folly [in which men seem to find satisfaction]; I realized that this too is a futile grasping and chasing after the wind. 18For in much [human] wisdom there is much displeasure and exasperation; increasing knowledge increases sorrow.

Ecclesiastes 2
The Futility Of Pleasure And Possessions
1I said to myself, “Come now, I will test you with pleasure and gratification; so enjoy yourself and have a good time.” But behold, this too was vanity (futility, meaninglessness). 2I said of laughter, “It is madness,” and of pleasure, “What does it accomplish?” 3I explored with my mind how to gratify myself with wine while [at the same time] having my mind remain steady and guide me wisely; and how to take control of foolishness, until I could see what was good for the sons of men to do under heaven all the days of their lives. 4I made great works: I built houses for myself; I planted vineyards for myself; 5I made gardens and orchards for myself and I planted in them all kinds of fruit trees; 6I made pools of water for myself from which to water the forest and make the trees bud. 7I bought male and female slaves and had slaves born in my house. I also possessed herds and flocks larger than any who preceded me in Jerusalem. 8Also, I collected for myself silver and gold and the treasure of kings and provinces. I provided for myself male singers and female singers, and the delights and pleasures of men—many concubines.
9So I became great and excelled more than all who preceded me in Jerusalem. My wisdom also remained with me. 10Whatever my eyes looked at with desire I did not refuse them. I did not withhold from my heart any pleasure, for my heart was pleased because of all my labor; and this was my reward for all my labor. 11Then I considered all which my hands had done and labored to do, and behold, all was vanity and chasing after the wind and there was no profit (nothing of lasting value) under the sun.
Wisdom Excels Folly 12So I turned to consider [secular] wisdom, madness, and folly; for what will the man do who succeeds the king? Nothing except what has already been done. 13Then I saw that [even secular] wisdom [that brings sorrow] is better than [the pleasures of] folly and self-indulgence as light excels darkness. 14The wise man’s eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness; and yet I know that [in the end] one fate happens to them both. 15Then I said to myself, “As it happens to the fool, so death will also happen to me. What use is it then for me to be extremely wise?” Then I said in my heart, “This too is vanity (meaningless).” 16For there is no [more] lasting remembrance of the wise man than of the fool, since in the days to come all will be long forgotten. And how does the wise man die? Even as the fool! 17So I hated life, for the work which had been done under the sun caused me only great sorrow; because all is futility and chasing after the wind.
The Futility of Labor 18So I hated all the fruit (gain) of my labor for which I had labored under the sun, because I must leave it to the man who will succeed me. 19And who knows whether he will be a wise man or a fool? Yet he will have control over all the fruit of my labor for which I have labored by acting wisely under the sun. This too is vanity (futility, self-conceit). 20So I turned aside and let my heart despair over all the fruit of my labor for which I had labored under the sun. 21For there is a man who has labored with wisdom and knowledge and skill, yet gives his legacy to one who has not labored for it. This too is vanity and a great evil. 22For what does a man get from all his labor and from the striving and sorrow of his heart with which he labors under the sun? 23For all his days his work is painful and sorrowful; even at night his mind does not rest. This too is vanity (worthless).
24There is nothing better for a man than to eat and drink and assure himself that there is good in his labor. Even this, I have seen, is from the hand of God. 25For who can eat and who can have enjoyment without Him? 26For to the person who pleases Him God gives wisdom, knowledge, and joy; but to the sinner He gives the work of gathering and collecting so that he may give to one who pleases God. This too is vanity and chasing after the wind.

Ecclesiastes 3
A Time For Everything
1There is a season (a time appointed) for everything and a time for every delight and event or purpose under heaven— 2A time to be born and a time to die;
A time to plant and a time to uproot what is planted. 3A time to kill and a time to heal;
A time to tear down and a time to build up. 4A time to weep and a time to laugh;
A time to mourn and a time to dance. 5A time to throw away stones and a time to gather stones;
A time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing. 6A time to search and a time to give up as lost;
A time to keep and a time to throw away. 7A time to tear apart and a time to sew together;
A time to keep silent and a time to speak. 8A time to love and a time to hate;
A time for war and a time for peace.
9What profit is there for the worker from that in which he labors? 10I have seen the task which God has given to the sons of men with which to occupy themselves. God Set Eternity in the Heart of Man 11He has made everything beautiful and appropriate in its time. He has also planted eternity [a sense of divine purpose] in the human heart [a mysterious longing which nothing under the sun can satisfy, except God]—yet man cannot find out (comprehend, grasp) what God has done (His overall plan) from the beginning to the end.
12I know that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and to do good as long as they live; 13and also that every man should eat and drink and see and enjoy the good of all his labor—it is the gift of God. 14I know that whatever God does, it endures forever; nothing can be added to it nor can anything be taken from it, for God does it so that men will fear and worship Him [with awe-filled reverence, knowing that He is God]. 15That which is has already been, and that which will be has already been, for God seeks what has passed by [so that history repeats itself].
16Moreover, I have seen under the sun that in the place of justice there is wickedness, and in the place of righteousness there is wickedness. 17I said to myself, “God will judge both the righteous and the wicked,” for there is a time [appointed] for every matter and for every deed. 18I said to myself regarding the sons of men, “God is surely testing them in order for them to see that [by themselves, without God] they are [only] animals.” 19For the [earthly] fate of the sons of men and the fate of animals is the same. As one dies, so dies the other; indeed, they all have the same breath and there is no preeminence or advantage for man [in and of himself] over an animal, for all is vanity. 20All go to the same place. All came from the dust and all return to the dust. 21Who knows if the spirit of man ascends upward and the spirit of the animal descends downward to the earth? 22So I have seen that there is nothing better than that a man should be happy in his own works and activities, for that is his portion (share). For who will bring him [back] to see what will happen after he is gone?

Ecclesiastes 4
The Evils Of Oppression
1Then I looked again and considered all the acts of oppression that were being practiced under the sun. And behold I saw the tears of the oppressed and they had no one to comfort them; and on the side of their oppressors was power, but they had no one to comfort them. 2So I congratulated and thought more fortunate are those who are already dead than the living who are still living. 3But better off than either of them is the one who has not yet been born, who has not seen the evil deeds that are done under the sun.
4I have seen that every [effort in] labor and every skill in work comes from man’s rivalry with his neighbor. This too is vanity (futility, false pride) and chasing after the wind. 5The fool folds his hands [together] and consumes his own flesh [destroying himself by idleness and apathy]. 6One hand full of rest and patience is better than two fists full of labor and chasing after the wind.
7Then I looked again at vanity under the sun [in one of its peculiar forms]. 8There was a certain man—without a dependent, having neither a child nor a brother, yet there was no end to all his labor. Indeed, his eyes were not satisfied with riches and he never asked, “For whom do I labor and deprive myself of pleasure?” This too is vanity (a wisp of smoke, self-conceit); yes, it is a painful effort and an unhappy task.
9Two are better than one because they have a more satisfying return for their labor; 10for if either of them falls, the one will lift up his companion. But woe to him who is alone when he falls and does not have another to lift him up. 11Again, if two lie down together, then they keep warm; but how can one be warm alone? 12And though one can overpower him who is alone, two can resist him. A cord of three strands is not quickly broken.
13A poor yet wise youth is better than an old and foolish king who no longer knows how to receive instruction and counsel (friendly reproof, warning)— 14for the poor youth has [used his wisdom and] come out of prison to become king, even though he was born poor in his kingdom. 15I have seen all the living under the sun join with the second youth (the king’s acknowledged successor) who replaces him. 16There is no end to all the people; to all who were before them. Yet those who come later will not be happy with him. Surely this also is vanity (emptiness) and chasing after the wind.

Ecclesiastes 5
Your Attitude Toward God
1Guard your steps and focus on what you are doing as you go to the house of God and draw near to listen rather than to offer the [careless or irreverent] sacrifice of fools; for they are too ignorant to know they are doing evil. 2Do not be hasty with your mouth [speaking careless words or vows] or impulsive in thought to bring up a matter before God. For God is in heaven and you are on earth; therefore let your words be few. 3For the dream comes through much effort, and the voice of the fool through many words.
4When you make a vow or a pledge to God, do not put off paying it; for God takes no pleasure in fools [who thoughtlessly mock Him]. Pay what you vow. 5It is better that you should not vow than that you should vow and not pay. 6Do not allow your speech to cause you to sin, and do not say before the messenger (priest) of God that it was a mistake. Why should God be angry because of your voice (words) and destroy the work of your hands? 7For in a multitude of dreams and in a flood of words there is worthlessness. Rather [reverently] fear God [and worship Him with awe-filled respect, knowing who He is].
8If you see the oppression of the poor and the denial of justice and righteousness in the province, do not be shocked at the sight [of corruption]; for a higher official watches over another official, and there are higher ones over them [looking out for one another]. 9After all, a king who cultivates the field is an advantage to the land.
The Folly of Riches 10He who loves money will not be satisfied with money, nor he who loves abundance with its gain. This too is vanity (emptiness). 11When good things increase, those who consume them increase. So what advantage is there to their owners except to see them with their eyes? 12The sleep of a working man is sweet, whether he eats little or much; but the full stomach (greed) of the rich [who hungers for even more] will not let him sleep.
13There is a grievous evil which I have seen under the sun: riches being kept and hoarded by their owner to his own misery. 14For when those riches are lost in bad investments and he becomes the father of a son, then there is nothing in his hand [for the support of the child]. 15As he came naked from his mother’s womb, so he will return as he came; and he will take away nothing from all his labor that he can carry in his hand. 16This also is a grievous evil—exactly as he was born, so he shall die. So what advantage has he who labors for the wind? 17All of his life he also eats in darkness [cheerlessly, without sweetness and light], with great frustration, sickness, and anger.
18Behold, here is what I have seen to be good and fitting: to eat and drink, and to find enjoyment in all the labor in which he labors under the sun during the few days of his life which God gives him—for this is his [allotted] reward. 19Also, every man to whom God has given riches and possessions, He has also given the power and ability to enjoy them and to receive [this as] his [allotted] portion and to rejoice in his labor—this is the gift of God [to him]. 20For he will not often consider the [troubled] days of his life, because God keeps him occupied and focused on the joy of his heart [and the tranquility of God indwells him].

Ecclesiastes 6
The Futility Of Life
1There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it weighs heavily on men: 2a man to whom God has given riches and wealth and honor, so that he lacks nothing of all that he desires, yet God has not given him the power or capacity to enjoy them [all those things which are gifts from God], but a stranger [in whom he has no interest succeeds him and] enjoys them. This is vanity and it is a [cause of] great distress. 3If a man fathers a hundred children and lives many years, however many they may be, but his soul is not satisfied with good things and he is not respected and is not given a proper burial [he is not laid to rest in the sepulcher of his fathers], then I say, “Better the miscarriage than he, 4for the miscarriage comes in futility (in vain) and passes into obscurity; and its name is covered in obscurity. 5It has not seen the sun nor had any knowledge; yet it has more rest and is better off than he. 6“Even if the other man lives a thousand years twice over and yet has seen no good and experienced no enjoyment—do not both go to one place [the grave]?”
7All the labor of man is for his mouth [for self-preservation and enjoyment], and yet the desire [of his soul] is not satisfied. 8For what advantage has the wise man over the fool [for being worldly-wise is not the secret to happiness]? What advantage has the poor man who has learned how to walk [publicly] among the living [with men’s eyes on him; for being poor is not the secret to happiness either]? 9What the eyes see [enjoying what is available] is better than [craving] what the soul desires. This too is futility and chasing after the wind.
10Whatever exists has already been named [long ago], and it is known what [a frail being] man is; for he cannot dispute with Him who is mightier than he. 11For there are many other words that increase futility. What then is the advantage for a man? 12For who [limited by human wisdom] knows what is good for man during his lifetime, during the few days of his futile life? He spends them like a shadow [staying busy, but achieving nothing of lasting value]. For who can tell a man what will happen after him [to his work, his treasure, his plans] under the sun [after his life is over]?

Ecclesiastes 7
Wisdom And Folly Contrasted
1A good name is better than precious perfume,
And the day of one’s death better than the day of one’s birth. 2It is better to go to the house of mourning
Than to go to the house of feasting,
For that [day of death] is the end of every man,
And the living will take it to heart and solemnly ponder its meaning. 3Sorrow is better than laughter,
For when a face is sad (deep in thought) the heart may be happy [because it is growing in wisdom]. 4The heart of the wise [learns when it] is in the house of mourning,
But the heart of fools is [senseless] in the house of pleasure. 5It is better to listen to the rebuke of the wise man and pursue wisdom
Than for one to listen to the song of fools and pursue stupidity. 6For like the crackling of [burning] thorn bushes under a pot,
So is the laughter of the fool;
And this too is vanity (futility). 7For oppression makes a wise man foolish,
And a bribe corrupts the [good judgment of the] heart. 8The end of a matter is better than its beginning;
Patience of spirit is better than haughtiness of spirit (pride). 9Do not be eager in your heart to be angry,
For anger dwells in the heart of fools. 10Do not say, “Why were the old days better than these?”
For it is not from wisdom that you ask about this. 11Wisdom along with an inheritance is good
And an [excellent] advantage for those who see the sun. 12For wisdom is a protection even as money is a protection,
But the [excellent] advantage of knowledge is that wisdom shields and preserves the lives of its possessors. 13Consider the work of God:
Who can make straight what He has bent? 14In the day of prosperity be joyful,
But in the day of adversity consider that
God has made the one as well as the other,
So that man will not find out anything that will be after him.
15I have seen everything during my [fleeting] days of futility; there is a righteous man who perishes in [spite of] his righteousness, and there is a wicked man who lives a long life in [spite of] his wickedness. 16Do not be excessively righteous [like those given to self-conceit], and do not be overly wise (pretentious)—why should you bring yourself to ruin? 17Do not be excessively or willfully wicked and do not be a fool. Why should you die before your time? 18It is good that you take hold of one thing (righteousness) and also not let go of the other (wisdom); for the one who fears and worships God [with awe-filled reverence] will come forth with both of them.
19Wisdom strengthens the wise man more than ten rulers who are in a city. 20Indeed, there is not a righteous man on earth who always does good and who never sins. 21Also, do not take seriously everything that is said, so that you will not hear your servant cursing you, 22for you also know that you too have cursed others many times.
23I have tested all this with wisdom. I said, “I will be wise [independently of God],” but true wisdom was far from me. 24Whatever has been is far off, deeply remote and exceedingly mysterious. Who can discover it [for it is beyond the grasp of man]? 25I turned around and directed my heart to know, to investigate and to seek [skillful and godly] wisdom and the reason for things, and to know that wickedness is folly and that foolishness is madness [leading to stupidity and recklessness]. 26And I discovered that [of all irrational sins none has been so destructive in beguiling one away from God as immoral women for] more bitter than death is the woman whose heart is [composed of] snares and nets, and whose hands are chains. Whoever pleases God will escape from her, but the sinner will be taken captive by her [evil].
27“Behold, I have discovered this,” says the Preacher, “while adding one thing to another to find an explanation, 28which I am still seeking but have not found. I have found one man among a thousand [who pleases God], but I have not found [such] a woman among all these [a thousand in my harem]. 29“Behold, I have found only this [as a reason]: God made man upright and uncorrupted, but they [both men and women] have sought out many devices [for evil].”

Ecclesiastes 8
Obey Rulers
1Who is like the wise man?
And who knows the interpretation of a matter?
A man’s wisdom illumines his face,
And causes his stern face to beam.
2I counsel you to keep the command of the king because of the oath before God [by which you swore loyalty to him]. 3Do not be in a hurry to get out of his presence. Do not join in a malevolent matter, for the king will do whatever he pleases. 4For the word of a king is authoritative and powerful,
And who will say to him, “What are you doing?” 5Whoever keeps and observes a royal command will experience neither trouble nor misery;
For a wise heart will know the proper time and [appropriate] procedure. 6For there is a proper time and [appropriate] procedure for every delight,
Though mankind’s misery and trouble lies heavily upon him [who rebels against the king]. 7For no one knows what will happen;
So who can tell him how and when it will happen? 8There is no man who has power and authority over the wind to restrain the wind,
Nor does he have authority over the day of death;
There is no discharge [from service] during time of war,
And evil will not rescue those who [actively seek to] practice it.
9All this I have seen while applying my mind to every deed that is done under the sun. There is a time in which one man has exercised power over others to their detriment.
10So then, I have seen the wicked buried, those who used to go in and out of the holy place [but did not thereby escape their doom], and they are [praised in spite of their evil and] soon forgotten in the city where they did such things. This too is futility (vanity, emptiness). 11Because the sentence against an evil act is not executed quickly, the hearts of the sons of men are fully set to do evil. 12Though a sinner does evil a hundred times and his life [seemingly] is prolonged [in spite of his wickedness], still I know that it will be well with those who [reverently] fear God, who fear and worship Him openly [realizing His omnipresence and His power]. 13But it will not be well for the evil man, nor will he lengthen his days like a shadow, because he does not fear God.
14There is a meaningless and futile thing which is done on the earth: that is, there are righteous men whose gain is as though they were evil, and evil men whose gain is as though they were righteous. I say that this too is futility (meaningless, vain). 15Then I commended pleasure and enjoyment, because a man [without God] has no better thing under the sun than to eat and to drink and to be merry, for this will stand by him in his toil through the days of his life which God has given him under the sun.
16When I applied my mind to know wisdom and to see the activities [of mankind] that take place upon the earth—how some men seem to sleep neither day nor night— 17and I saw all the work of God, I concluded that man cannot discover the work that is done under the sun. Even though man may labor in seeking, he will not discover; and [more than that], though a wise man thinks and claims he knows, he will not be able to find it out.

Ecclesiastes 9
Men Are In The Hand Of God
1For I have taken all this to heart, exploring and examining it all, how the righteous (those in right standing with God) and the wise and their deeds are in the hands of God. No man knows whether it will be love or hatred; anything awaits him.
2It is the same for all. There is one fate for the righteous and for the wicked; for the good, for the clean and for the unclean; for the man who offers sacrifices and for the one who does not sacrifice. As the good man is, so is the sinner; as he who swears an oath is, so is he who is afraid to swear an oath. 3This evil is in all that is done under the sun, that one fate comes to all. Also, the hearts of the sons of men are full of evil, and madness is in their hearts while they live, and afterwards they go to the dead. 4[There is no exemption,] but whoever is joined with all the living, has hope; surely a live dog is better than a dead lion. 5For the living know that they will die; but the dead know nothing, and they no longer have a reward [here], for the memory of them is forgotten. 6Indeed their love, their hatred and their zeal have already perished, and they will no longer have a share [in this age] in anything that is done under the sun.
7Go your way, eat your bread with joy and drink your wine with a cheerful heart [if you are righteous, wise, and in the hands of God]; for God has already approved and accepted your works. 8Let your clothes always be white [with purity], and do not let the oil [of gladness] be lacking on your head. 9Live joyfully with the wife whom you love all the days of your fleeting life which He has given you under the sun—all the days of vanity and futility. For this is your reward in life and in your work in which you have labored under the sun.
Whatever Your Hand Finds to Do 10Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with all your might; for there is no activity or planning or knowledge or wisdom in Sheol (the nether world, the place of the dead) where you are going.
11I again saw under the sun that the race is not to the swift and the battle is not to the strong, and neither is bread to the wise nor riches to those of intelligence and understanding nor favor to men of ability; but time and chance overtake them all. 12For man also does not know his time [of death]; like fish caught in a treacherous net, and birds caught in the snare, so the sons of men are ensnared in an evil time when a dark cloud suddenly falls on them.
13This [illustration of] wisdom I have also seen under the sun, and great it was to me: 14There was a little city with few men in it and a great king came against it and besieged it and built great battlements against it. 15But there was found in it a poor wise man, and by his wisdom he rescued the city. Yet no man [seriously] remembered that poor man. 16But I say that wisdom is better than strength, though the poor man’s wisdom is despised and his words are not heeded. 17The words of wise men heard in quietness are better than the shouting of one who rules among fools. 18Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but one sinner destroys much good.

Ecclesiastes 10
A Little Foolishness
1Dead flies make the oil of the perfumer give off a foul odor; so a little foolishness [in one who is esteemed] outweighs wisdom and honor. 2A wise man’s heart turns him toward the right [which is the way of blessing], but a fool’s heart turns him toward the left [which is the way of condemnation]. 3Even when a fool walks along the road, his [common] sense and good judgment fail him and he demonstrates to everyone that he is a fool. 4If the temper of the ruler rises against you, do not leave your post [showing resistance], because composure and calmness prevent great offenses.
5There is an evil I have seen under the sun, like an error which proceeds from the ruler— 6folly is set in many exalted places and in great dignity while the rich sit in humble places. 7I have seen slaves riding on horses and princes walking like slaves on the ground.
8He who digs a pit [for others] may fall into it, and a serpent may bite him who breaks through a [stone] wall. 9He who quarries stones may be hurt with them, and he who splits logs may be endangered by them. 10If the axe is dull and he does not sharpen its edge, then he must exert more strength; but wisdom [to sharpen the axe] helps him succeed [with less effort]. 11If the serpent bites before being charmed, then there is no profit for the charmer. 12The words of a wise man’s mouth are gracious and win him favor, but the lips of a fool consume him; 13the beginning of his talking is foolishness and the end of his talk is wicked madness. 14Yet the fool multiplies words, though no man knows what will happen, and who can tell him what will come after he is gone? 15The labor of a fool so wearies him [because he is ignorant] that he does not even know how to go to a city. 16Woe to you, O land, when your king is a child and when your [incompetent] officials and princes feast in the morning. 17Blessed [prosperous and admired] are you, O land, when your king is a man of noble birth, and your princes and officials feast at the proper time—for strength and not for drunkenness. 18Through laziness the rafters [of state affairs] decay and the roof sags, and through idleness [the roof of] the house leaks. 19The officials make a feast for enjoyment [instead of repairing what is broken], and serve wine to make life merry, and money is the answer to everything. 20Moreover, do not curse the king, even in your bedroom, and in your sleeping rooms do not curse the rich, for a bird of the air will carry the sound and a winged creature will make the matter known.

Ecclesiastes 11
Cast Your Bread On The Waters
1Cast your bread on the surface of the waters, [be diligently active, make thoughtful decisions], for you will find it after many days. 2Give a portion to seven, or even [divide it] to eight, for you do not know what misfortune may occur on the earth. 3If the clouds are full [of rain], they empty themselves on the earth; and if a tree falls toward the south or toward the north, in the place where the tree falls, there it lies. 4He who watches the wind [waiting for all conditions to be perfect] will not sow [seed], and he who looks at the clouds will not reap [a harvest]. 5Just as you do not know the way and path of the wind or how the bones are formed in the womb of a pregnant woman, even so you do not know the activity of God who makes all things.
6Sow your seed in the morning and do not be idle with your hands in the evening, for you do not know whether morning or evening planting will succeed, whether this or that, or whether both alike will be good.
7The light is sweet and pleasant, and it is good for the eyes to see the sun. 8Yes, if a man should live many years, let him rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they will be many. All that is to come will be futility.
9Rejoice, young man, in your childhood, and let your heart be pleasant in the days of your young manhood. And walk in the ways of your heart and in the desires of your eyes, but know that God will bring you into judgment for all these things. 10Therefore, remove sorrow and anger from your heart and put away pain from your body, for childhood and the prime of life are fleeting.

Ecclesiastes 12
Remember God In Your Youth
1Remember [thoughtfully] also your Creator in the days of your youth [for you are not your own, but His], before the evil days come or the years draw near when you will say [of physical pleasures], “I have no enjoyment and delight in them”; 2before the sun and the light, and the moon and the stars are darkened [by impaired vision], and the clouds [of depression] return after the rain [of tears]; 3in the day when the keepers of the house (hands, arms) tremble, and the strong men (feet, knees) bow themselves, and the grinders (molar teeth) cease because they are few, and those (eyes) who look through the windows grow dim; 4when the doors (lips) are shut in the streets and the sound of the grinding [of the teeth] is low, and one rises at the sound of a bird and the crowing of a rooster, and all the daughters of music (voice, ears) sing softly. 5Furthermore, they are afraid of a high place and of dangers on the road; the almond tree (hair) blossoms [white], and the grasshopper (a little thing) is a burden, and the caperberry (desire, appetite) fails. For man goes to his eternal home and the mourners go about the streets and market places. 6Earnestly remember your Creator before the silver cord [of life] is broken, or the golden bowl is crushed, or the pitcher at the fountain is shattered and the wheel at the cistern is crushed; 7then the dust [out of which God made man’s body] will return to the earth as it was, and the spirit will return to God who gave it. 8“Vanity of vanities,” says the Preacher. “All [that is done without God’s guidance] is vanity (futility).”
Purpose of the Preacher 9Furthermore, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; and he pondered and searched out and arranged many proverbs. 10The Preacher sought to find delightful words, even to write correctly words of truth.
11The words of the wise are like [prodding] goads, and these collected sayings are [firmly fixed in the mind] like well-driven nails; they are given by one Shepherd. 12But beyond this my son, [about going further than the words given by one Shepherd], be warned: the writing of many books is endless [so do not believe everything you read], and excessive study and devotion to books is wearying to the body.
13When all has been heard, the end of the matter is: fear God [worship Him with awe-filled reverence, knowing that He is almighty God] and keep His commandments, for this applies to every person. 14For God will bring every act to judgment, every hidden and secret thing, whether it is good or evil.

Song of Songs 1
The Young Shulammite Bride And Jerusalem’s Daughters
1The Song of Songs [the best of songs], which is Solomon’s. (The Shulammite Bride) 2“May he kiss me with the kisses of his mouth!” [Solomon arrives, she turns to him, saying,]
“For your love is better than wine. 3“The aroma of your oils is fragrant and pleasing;
Your name is perfume poured out;
Therefore the maidens love you. 4“Draw me away with you and let us run together!
Let the king bring me into his chambers.” (The Chorus) “We will rejoice and be glad in you;
We will remember and extol your love more [sweet and fragrant] than wine.
Rightly do they love you.”
(The Shulammite Bride) 5“I am deeply tanned but lovely,
O daughters of Jerusalem,
[I am dark] like the tents of [the Bedouins of] Kedar,
Like the [beautiful] curtains of Solomon. 6“Do not gaze at me because I am deeply tanned,
[I have worked in] the sun; it has left its mark on me.
My mother’s sons were angry with me;
They made me keeper of the vineyards,
But my own vineyard (my complexion) I have not kept.” 7“Tell me, O you whom my soul loves,
Where do you pasture your flock,
Where do you make it lie down at noon?
For why should I be like one who is veiled
Beside the flocks of your companions?” Solomon, the Lover, Speaks
(The Bridegroom) 8“If you do not know [where your lover is],
O you fairest among women,
Run along, follow the tracks of the flock,
And pasture your young goats
By the tents of the shepherds. 9“To me, my love, you are like
My [favorite] mare among the chariots of Pharaoh. 10“Your cheeks are lovely with ornaments,
Your neck with strings of jewels.” (The Chorus) 11“We will make for you chains and ornaments of gold,
[Studded] with beads of silver.” (The Shulammite Bride) 12“While the king was at his table,
My perfume (Solomon) sent forth [his] fragrance [surrounding me]. 13“My beloved is to me like a pouch of myrrh
Which lies all night between my breasts. 14“My beloved is to me a cluster of henna flowers
In the [fragrant] vineyards of Engedi.” (The Bridegroom) 15“Behold, how beautiful you are, my darling,
Behold, how beautiful you are!
Your eyes are dove’s eyes.” (The Shulammite Bride) 16“Behold, how fair and handsome you are, my beloved;
And so delightful!
Our arbor is green and luxuriant. 17“The beams of our houses are cedars,
Our rafters and panels are cypresses.

Song of Songs 2
The Bride’s Admiration
1“I am the rose [of the plain] of Sharon,
The lily of the valleys [that grows in deep places].” (The Bridegroom) 2“Like the lily among the thorns,
So are you, my darling, among the maidens.” (The Shulammite Bride) 3“Like an apple tree [rare and welcome] among the trees of the forest,
So is my beloved among the young men!
In his shade I took great delight and sat down,
And his fruit was sweet and delicious to my palate. 4“He has brought me to his banqueting place,
And his banner over me is love [waving overhead to protect and comfort me]. 5“Sustain me with raisin cakes,
Refresh me with apples,
Because I am sick with love. 6“Let his left hand be under my head
And his right hand embrace me.” (The Bridegroom) 7“I command that you take an oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,
By the gazelles or by the does of the field [which run free],
That you do not rouse nor awaken my love
Until she pleases.” (The Shulammite Bride) 8“Listen! My beloved!
Behold, he comes,
Climbing on the mountains,
Leaping and running on the hills! 9“My beloved is like a gazelle or a young stag.
Behold, he is standing behind our wall,
He is looking through the windows,
He is gazing through the lattice. 10“My beloved speaks and says to me,
‘Arise, my love, my fair one,
And come away. 11‘For behold, the winter is past,
The rain is over and gone. 12‘The flowers appear on the earth once again;
The time for singing has come,
And the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land. 13‘The fig tree has budded and ripens her figs,
And the vines are in blossom and give forth their fragrance.
Arise, my love, my fair one,
And come away [to climb the rocky steps of the hillside].’” (The Bridegroom) 14“O my dove, [here] in the clefts in the rock,
In the sheltered and secret place of the steep pathway,
Let me see your face,
Let me hear your voice;
For your voice is sweet,
And your face is lovely.” (The Chorus) 15“Catch the foxes for us,
The little foxes that spoil and ruin the vineyards [of love],
While our vineyards are in blossom.” (The Shulammite Bride) 16“My beloved is mine and I am his;
He pastures his flock among the lilies. 17“Until the cool of the day when the shadows flee away,
Return quickly, my beloved, and be like a gazelle
Or a young stag on the mountains of Bether [which separate us].”

Song of Songs 3
The Bride’s Troubled Dream
(The Shulammite Bride) 1“On my bed night after night [I dreamed that] I sought the one
Whom my soul loves;
I sought him but did not find him. 2“I said ‘So I must arise now and go out into the city;
Into the streets and into the squares [places I do not know]
I must seek him whom my soul loves.’
I sought him but I did not find him. 3“The watchmen who go around the city found me,
And I said, ‘Have you seen him whom my soul loves?’ 4“Scarcely had I passed them
When I found him whom my soul loves.
I held on to him and would not let him go
Until I had brought him to my mother’s house,
And into the chamber of her who conceived me.” (The Bridegroom) 5“I command that you take an oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,
By the gazelles or by the does of the field,
That you do not rouse nor awaken my love
Until she pleases.” Solomon’s Wedding Day
(The Shulammite Bride) 6“What is this coming up from the wilderness
Like [stately] pillars of smoke
Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,
With all the fragrant powders of the merchant?” (The Chorus) 7“Behold, it is the couch (palanquin) of Solomon;
Sixty mighty men around it,
Of the mighty men of Israel. 8“All of them handle the sword,
All expert in war;
Each man has his sword at his thigh,
Guarding against the terrors of the night. 9“King Solomon has made for himself a palanquin
From the [cedar] wood of Lebanon. 10“He made its posts of silver,
Its back of gold,
Its seat of purple cloth,
The interior lovingly and intricately wrought
By the daughters of Jerusalem. 11“Go forth, O daughters of Zion,
And gaze on King Solomon wearing the crown
With which his mother [Bathsheba] has crowned him
On the day of his wedding,
On the day of his gladness of heart.”

Song of Songs 4
Solomon’s Love Expressed
(The Bridegroom) 1“How fair and beautiful you are, my darling,
How very beautiful!
Your eyes behind your veil are like those of a dove;
Your hair is like [the shimmering black fleece of] a flock of [Arabian] goats
That have descended from Mount Gilead [beyond the Jordan]. 2“Your teeth are like a flock of newly shorn ewes
Which have come up from washing,
All of which bear twins,
And not one among them has lost her young. 3“Your lips are like a ribbon of scarlet,
And your mouth is lovely.
Your temples are like a slice of the pomegranate
Behind your veil. 4“Your neck is like the tower of David,
Built with rows of [glistening] stones,
Whereon hang a thousand shields,
All of them shields of warriors. 5“Your two breasts are like two fawns,
Twins of a gazelle
Which feed among the lilies. 6“Until the day breaks
And the shadows flee away,
[In my thoughts] I will go my way to the mountain of myrrh
And to the hill of frankincense. 7“O my love, you are altogether beautiful and fair.
There is no flaw nor blemish in you! 8“Come away with me from Lebanon, my [promised] bride,
May you come with me from Lebanon.
Journey down from the top of Amana,
From the summit of Senir and Hermon,
From the dens of lions,
From the mountains of leopards. 9“You have ravished my heart and given me courage, my sister, my [promised] bride;
You have ravished my heart and given me courage with a single glance of your eyes,
With one jewel of your necklace. 10“How beautiful is your love, my sister, my [promised] bride!
How much better is your love than wine,
And the fragrance of your oils
Than all kinds of balsam and spices. 11“Your lips, my [promised] bride, drip honey [as the honeycomb];
Honey and milk are under your tongue,
And the fragrance of your garments is like the fragrance of Lebanon. 12“A garden enclosed is my sister, my [promised] bride—
A rock garden locked, a spring sealed up. 13“Your shoots are an orchard of pomegranates,
[A paradise] with precious fruits, henna with fragrant plants, 14Fragrant plants and saffron, calamus and cinnamon,
With all trees of frankincense,
Myrrh and aloes, along with all the finest spices. 15“You are a fountain in a garden,
A well of fresh and living water,
And streams flowing from Lebanon.” (The Shulammite Bride) 16“Awake, O north wind,
And come, south wind [blow softly upon my garden];
Make my garden breathe out fragrance, [for the one in whom my soul delights],
Let its spices flow forth.
Let my beloved come into his garden
And eat its choicest fruits.”

Song of Songs 5
The Torment Of Separation
(The Bridegroom) 1“I have come into my garden, my sister, my [promised] bride;
I have gathered my myrrh along with my balsam and spice [from your sweet words].
I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey;
I have drunk my wine with my milk.
Eat, friends;
Drink and drink deeply, O lovers.” (The Shulammite Bride) 2“I was asleep, but my heart was awake.
A voice [in my dream]! My beloved was knocking:
‘Open to me, my sister, my darling,
My dove, my perfect one!
For my head is drenched with the [heavy night] dew;
My hair [is covered] with the dampness of the night.’ 3“I had taken off my dress,
How can I put it on again?
I had washed my feet,
How could I get them dirty again? 4“My beloved extended his hand through the opening [of the door],
And my feelings were aroused for him. 5“I arose to open for my beloved;
And my hands dripped with myrrh,
And my fingers with liquid [sweet-scented] myrrh,
On the handles of the bolt. 6“I opened for my beloved,
But my beloved had turned away and was gone.
My heart went out to him when he spoke.
I searched for him, but I could not find him;
I called him, but he did not answer me. 7“The watchmen who make the rounds in the city found me.
They struck me, they wounded me;
The guardsmen of the walls took my shawl from me. 8“I command that you take an oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,
If you find my beloved,
As to what you tell him—
[Say that] I am sick from love [sick from being without him].” (The Chorus) 9“What is your beloved more than another beloved,
O most beautiful among women?
What is your beloved more than another beloved,
That you should so command us to take an oath?” Admiration by the Bride
(The Shulammite Bride) 10“My beloved is exquisitely handsome and ruddy,
Outstanding among ten thousand. 11“His head is like [precious] gold, pure gold;
His hair is [curly] like clusters of dates
And black as a raven. 12“His eyes are like doves
Beside streams of water,
Bathed in milk
And reposed in their setting. 13“His cheeks are like a bed of balsam,
Banks of sweet, fragrant herbs.
His lips are lilies
Dripping sweet-scented myrrh. 14“His hands are rods of gold
Set with beryl;
His abdomen is a figure of carved ivory
Inlaid with sapphires. 15“His legs are [strong and steady] pillars of alabaster
Set upon pedestals of fine gold.
His appearance is like Lebanon,
Stately and choice as the cedars. 16“His mouth is full of sweetness;
Yes, he is altogether lovely and desirable.
This is my beloved and this is my friend,
O daughters of Jerusalem.”

Song of Songs 6
Mutual Delight In Each Other
(The Chorus) 1“Where has your beloved gone,
O most beautiful among women?
Where is your beloved hiding himself,
That we may seek him with you?” (The Shulammite Bride) 2“My beloved has gone down to his garden,
To the beds of balsam,
To feed his flock in the gardens
And gather lilies. 3“I am my beloved’s and my beloved is mine,
He who feeds his flock among the lilies.” (The Bridegroom) 4“You are as beautiful as Tirzah, my darling,
As lovely as Jerusalem,
As majestic as an army with banners! 5“Turn your [flashing] eyes away from me,
For they have confused and overcome me;
Your hair is like [the shimmering black fleece of] a flock of [Arabian] goats
That have descended from Mount Gilead. 6“Your teeth are like a flock of ewes
Which have come up from their washing,
All of which bear twins,
And not one among them has lost her young. 7“Your temples are like a slice of the pomegranate
Behind your veil. 8“There are sixty queens and eighty concubines,
And maidens without number; 9But my dove, my perfect one, stands alone [above them all];
She is her mother’s only daughter;
She is the pure child of the one who bore her.
The maidens saw her and called her blessed and happy,
The queens and the concubines also, and they praised her, saying, 10‘Who is this that looks down like the dawn,
Fair and beautiful as the full moon,
Clear and pure as the sun,
As majestic as an army with banners?’ 11“I went down to the orchard of nut trees
To see the flowers of the valley,
To see whether the grapevine had budded
And the pomegranates were in flower. 12“Before I was aware [of what was happening], my desire had brought me
Into the area of the princes of my people [the king’s retinue].” (The Chorus) 13“Return, return, O Shulammite;
Return, return, that we may gaze at you.”

Song of Songs 7
Admiration By The Bridegroom
1“How beautiful are your feet in sandals,
O prince’s daughter!
The curves of your hips are like jewels,
The work of the hands of an artist. 2“Your navel is a round goblet
Which never lacks mixed wine.
Your belly is like a heap of wheat
Surrounded with lilies. 3“Your two breasts are like two fawns,
The twins of a gazelle. 4“Your neck is like a tower of ivory,
Your eyes the [sparkling] pools of Heshbon
By the gate of Bath-rabbim.
Your nose is like the tower of Lebanon
Which looks toward Damascus. 5“Your head crowns you like Mount Carmel,
And the flowing hair of your head like purple threads;
I, the king, am held captive by your tresses. 6“How beautiful and how delightful you are,
My love, with all your delights! 7“Your stature is like that of a palm tree
And your breasts like its clusters [of dates]. 8“I said, ‘I will climb the palm tree;
I will grasp its branches.
Let your breasts be like clusters of the grapevine,
And the fragrance of your breath like apples, 9‘And your kisses like the best wine!’” (The Shulammite Bride) “It goes down smoothly and sweetly for my beloved,
Gliding gently over his lips while he sleeps.
The Union of Love 10“I am my beloved’s,
And his desire is for me. 11“Come, my beloved, let us go out into the country,
Let us spend the night in the villages. 12“Let us go out early to the vineyards;
Let us see whether the vine has budded
And its blossoms have opened,
And whether the pomegranates have flowered.
There I will give you my love. 13“The mandrakes give forth fragrance,
And over our doors are all [kinds of] choice fruits,
Both new and old,
Which I have saved up for you, my beloved.

Song of Songs 8
The Lovers Speak
1“Oh, that you were like a brother to me,
Who nursed at the breasts of my mother.
If I found you out of doors, I would kiss you;
No one would blame me or despise me, either. 2“I would lead you and bring you
Into the house of my mother, who used to instruct me;
I would give you spiced wine to drink from the juice of my pomegranates. 3“Let his left hand be under my head
And his right hand embrace me.” (The Bridegroom) 4“I command you to take an oath, O daughters of Jerusalem,
That you do not rouse nor awaken my love
Until she pleases.” (The Chorus) 5“Who is this coming up from the wilderness
Leaning upon her beloved?” (The Shulammite Bride) “Under the apple tree I awakened you [to my love];
There your mother was in labor with you,
There she was in labor and gave you birth. 6“Put me like a seal on your heart,
Like a seal on your arm;
For love is as strong as death,
Jealousy is as severe and cruel as Sheol (the place of the dead).
Its flashes are flashes of fire,
[A most vehement flame] the very flame of the LORD! 7“Many waters cannot quench love,
Nor can rivers drown it.
If a man would offer all the riches of his house for love,
It would be utterly scorned and despised.” (The Chorus) 8“We have a little sister
And she has no breasts.
What shall we do for our sister
On the day when she is spoken for [in marriage]? 9“If she is a wall (discreet, womanly),
We will build on her a turret (dowry) of silver;
But if she is a door (bold, flirtatious),
We will enclose her with planks of cedar.” (The Shulammite Bride) 10“I was a wall, and my breasts were like the towers.
Then I became in the king’s eyes
As one [to be respected and allowed] to find peace. 11“Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon;
He entrusted the vineyard to caretakers;
Each one was to bring him a thousand shekels of silver for its fruit. 12“My very own vineyard is at my disposal;
The thousand [shekels of silver] are for you, O Solomon,
And two hundred are for those who tend the fruit.” (The Bridegroom) 13“O you who sit in the gardens,
My companions are listening for your voice—
Let me hear it.” (The Shulammite Bride) 14“Hurry, my beloved and come quickly,
Like a gazelle or a young stag [taking me home]
On the mountains of spices.”

Isaiah 1
Rebellion Of God’s People
1The vision of [the prophet] Isaiah the son of Amoz concerning [the kingdom of] Judah and [its capital] Jerusalem, which he saw [as revealed by God] during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. 2Hear, O heavens, and listen, O earth;
For the LORD has spoken:
“I have reared and brought up sons,
But they have rebelled against Me and have broken away. 3“The ox [instinctively] knows its owner,
And the donkey its master’s feeding trough,
But Israel does not know [Me as LORD],
My people do not understand.” 4Ah, sinful nation,
A people loaded down with wickedness [with sin, with injustice, with wrongdoing],
Offspring of evildoers,
Sons who behave corruptly!
They have abandoned (rejected) the LORD,
They have despised the Holy One of Israel [provoking Him to anger],
They have turned away from Him. 5Why should you be stricken and punished again [since no change results from it]?
You [only] continue to rebel.
The whole head is sick
And the whole heart is faint and sick. 6From the sole of the foot even to the head
There is nothing healthy in the nation’s body,
Only bruises, welts, and raw wounds,
Not pressed out or bandaged,
Nor softened with oil [as a remedy]. 7Your land lies desolate [because of your disobedience],
Your cities are burned with fire,
Your fields—strangers are devouring them in your very presence;
It is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. 8The Daughter of Zion (Jerusalem) is left like a [deserted] shelter in a vineyard,
Like a watchman’s hut in a cucumber field, like a besieged city [isolated, surrounded by devastation]. 9If the LORD of hosts
Had not left us a few survivors,
We would be like Sodom,
We would be like Gomorrah. God Has Had Enough 10Hear the word of the LORD [rulers of Jerusalem],
You rulers of [another] Sodom,
Listen to the law and instruction of our God,
You people of [another] Gomorrah. 11“What are your multiplied sacrifices to Me [without your repentance]?”
Says the LORD.
“I have had enough of [your] burnt offerings of rams
And the fat of well-fed cattle [without your obedience];
And I take no pleasure in the blood of bulls or lambs or goats [offered without repentance]. 12“When you come to appear before Me,
Who requires this of you, this trampling of My [temple] courts [by your sinful feet]? 13“Do not bring worthless offerings again,
[Your] incense is repulsive to Me;
[Your] New Moon and Sabbath [observances], the calling of assemblies—
I cannot endure wickedness [your sin, your injustice, your wrongdoing] and [the squalor of] the festive assembly. 14“I hate [the hypocrisy of] your New Moon festivals and your appointed feasts.
They have become a burden to Me;
I am weary of bearing them. 15“So when you spread out your hands [in prayer, pleading for My help],
I will hide My eyes from you;
Yes, even though you offer many prayers,
I will not be listening.
Your hands are full of blood! 16“Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean;
Get your evil deeds out of My sight.
Stop doing evil, 17Learn to do good.
Seek justice,
Rebuke the ruthless,
Defend the fatherless,
Plead for the [rights of the] widow [in court]. “Let Us Reason” 18“Come now, and let us reason together,”
Says the LORD.
“Though your sins are like scarlet,
They shall be as white as snow;
Though they are red like crimson,
They shall be like wool. 19“If you are willing and obedient,
You shall eat the best of the land; 20But if you refuse and rebel,
You shall be devoured by the sword.”
For the mouth of the LORD has spoken. Zion Corrupted, to Be Redeemed 21How the faithful city has become a prostitute [idolatrous, despicable],
She who was full of justice!
Right standing with God once lodged in her,
But now murderers. 22Your silver has turned to lead,
Your wine is diluted with water. 23Your rulers are rebels
And companions of thieves;
Everyone loves bribes
And chases after gifts.
They do not defend the fatherless,
Nor does the widow’s cause come before them [instead they delay or turn a deaf ear]. 24Therefore the Lord GOD of hosts,
The Mighty One of Israel, declares:
“Ah, I will be freed of My adversaries
And avenge Myself on My enemies. 25“And I will turn My hand against you,
And will [thoroughly] purge away your dross as with lye
And remove all your tin (impurity). 26“Then I will restore your judges as at the first,
And your counselors as at the beginning;
Afterward you will be called the city of righteousness,
The faithful city.” 27Zion will be redeemed with justice
And her repentant ones with righteousness. 28But rebels and sinners will be crushed and destroyed together,
And those who abandon (turn away from) the LORD will be consumed (perish). 29For you will be ashamed [of the degradation] of the oaks in which you took [idolatrous] pleasure,
And you will be ashamed of the gardens [of passion] which you have chosen [for pagan worship]. 30For you will be like an oak whose leaf withers and dies
And like a garden that has no water. 31The strong man will become tinder,
And his work a spark.
So both will burn together
And there will be none to quench them.

Isaiah 2
God’s Universal Reign
1The word [from God] which Isaiah son of Amoz saw [in a vision] concerning [the nation of] Judah and [its capital city] Jerusalem. 2Now it will come to pass that
In the last days
The mountain of the house of the LORD
Will be [firmly] established as the highest of the mountains,
And will be exalted above the hills;
And all the nations will stream to it. 3And many peoples shall come and say,
“Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD,
To the house (temple) of the God of Jacob;
That He may teach us His ways
And that we may walk in His paths.”
For the law will go out from Zion
And the word of the LORD from Jerusalem. 4And He will judge between the nations,
And will mediate [disputes] for many peoples;
And they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks.
Nation will not lift up the sword against nation,
And never again will they learn war. 5O house of Jacob, come, let us walk in the light of the LORD. 6Most certainly [LORD] You have abandoned your people, the house of Jacob,
Because they are filled with influences from the east,
And they are soothsayers [who foretell] like the Philistines;
Also they strike bargains with the children of foreigners (pagans). 7Their land has also been filled with silver and gold
And there is no end to their treasures;
Their land has also been filled with horses
And there is no end to their chariots. 8Their land has also been filled with idols;
They worship the work of their hands,
That which their own fingers have made. 9So the common man has been humbled [before idols]
And the man of importance has been degraded,
Therefore do not forgive them [O LORD]. 10Go among the rocks and hide in the dust
From the terror of the LORD and from the splendor of His majesty. 11The proud look of man will be degraded
And the arrogance of men will be humbled,
And the LORD alone will be exalted in that day. A Day of Reckoning Coming 12For the LORD of hosts will have a day of reckoning
Against all who are proud and arrogant
And against all who are lifted up,
That they may be degraded. 13And the wrath of God will be against all the cedars of Lebanon [west of the Jordan] that are high and lifted up,
Against all the oaks of Bashan [east of the Jordan], 14Against all the high mountains,
Against all the hills that are lifted up, 15Against every high tower,
Against every fortified wall, 16Against all the ships of Tarshish
And against all the beautiful craft. 17Then the pride of man will be humbled
And the arrogance of men will be degraded;
The LORD alone shall be exalted in that day, 18And the idols will completely vanish (be abolished). 19They [the stricken, deprived of all in which they had trusted] will go into the caves of the rocks
And into the holes of the ground [fleeing]
From the terror and dread of the LORD
And from the splendor of His majesty,
When He arises to terrify the earth. 20In that day men will throw away to the moles and to the bats
Their idols of silver and their idols of gold,
Which they made for themselves [as objects] to worship, 21To go into the caverns of the rocks and into the clefts of the [ragged] cliffs [as they flee]
From the terror and dread of the LORD and the splendor of His majesty,
When He arises to terrify the earth. 22Stop regarding man, whose breath [of life] is in his nostrils [for so little time];
For why should he be esteemed?

Isaiah 3
God Will Remove The Leaders
1Listen carefully, the Lord GOD of hosts is removing from Jerusalem and from Judah
Both supply and support, the whole supply of bread
And the whole supply of water; 2The brave man and the warrior [He is also removing],
The judge and the prophet,
The diviner and the elder, 3The captain of fifty and the man of honor,
The counselor and the expert artisan,
And the skillful enchanter. 4And I will make mere boys their princes,
And capricious (impulsive, unpredictable) children will rule over them. 5And the people will be oppressed,
Each one by another, and each one by his neighbor;
The boy will be arrogant and insolent toward the elder
And the vulgar (common) toward the honorable [person of rank]. 6When a man takes hold of his brother in the house of his father, saying,
“You have a robe, you shall be our judge and ruler,
And this pile of ruins will be under your control,” 7He will protest on that day, saying,
“I will not be a governor;
For in my house there is neither bread nor clothing;
You should not make me a judge and ruler of the people.” 8For Jerusalem has stumbled and Judah has fallen,
Because their words and their actions are against the LORD,
To rebel against His glorious presence and defiantly provoke Him. 9Their partiality testifies against them,
They display their sin like Sodom;
They do not even hide it.
Woe (judgment is coming) to them!
For they have brought evil on themselves [as a reward]. 10Say to the righteous that it will go well with them,
For they will eat the fruit of their [righteous] actions. 11Woe (judgment is coming) to the wicked! It shall go badly with him,
For what his hand has done shall be done to him. 12O My people! Children are their oppressors,
And women rule over them.
O My people! Your leaders lead you astray
And confuse (destroy, swallow up) the direction of your paths. God Will Judge 13The LORD rises to contend,
And stands to judge the people. 14The LORD enters into judgment with the elders of His people and their princes,
“For it is you who have devoured the vineyard [with your oppression, you have robbed the people and ruined the country];
The plunder of the poor is in your houses. 15“What do you mean by crushing My people
And grinding the face of the poor?”
Declares the Lord GOD of hosts. Judah’s Women Denounced 16Moreover, the LORD said, “Because the daughters of Zion are proud
And walk with outstretched necks and seductive (flirtatious, alluring) eyes,
And trip along with mincing steps and an affected gait
And walk with jingling anklets on their feet, 17Therefore the Lord will afflict the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion with scabs [making them bald],
And the LORD will expose their foreheads (send them into captivity).”
18In that day the Lord will take away the beauty of their anklets, [braided] caps, crescent [head] ornaments, 19dangling earrings, bracelets, and the hanging veils and scarves, 20head wraps (turbans), [short, jingling] ankle chains, sashes, perfume boxes, amulets (charms), 21signet [finger] rings, nose rings, 22festival robes, outer tunics, shawls, handbags, 23hand mirrors, [fine linen] undergarments, headbands, and veils [covering the entire body]. 24Now it will come to pass that instead of the sweet fragrance of spices there will be [the stench of] rottenness;
Instead of a belt, a rope;
Instead of well-set hair, baldness;
Instead of fine clothes, a robe of sackcloth;
And branding [of captives by the scorching heat] instead of beauty. 25Your men will fall by the sword
And your mighty men in battle. 26And Jerusalem’s gates will lament (cry out in grief) and mourn [as those who wail for the dead];
And she, being ruined and desolate, will sit upon the ground.

Isaiah 4
A Remnant Prepared
1And in that day seven women will take hold of one man, saying, “We will eat our own food and wear [and provide] our own clothes; only let us be called by your name; take away our shame [of being unmarried].”
2In that day the Branch of the LORD will be splendid and glorious, and the fruit of the land will be excellent and lovely to those of Israel who have survived. 3It will come to pass that he who is left in Zion and remains in Jerusalem will be called holy (set apart for God)—everyone who is recorded for [eternal] life in Jerusalem. 4When the Lord has washed away the [moral] filth of the daughters of Zion and has cleansed the bloodstains of Jerusalem from her midst, by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning, 5then the LORD will create over the entire site of Mount Zion and over her assemblies, a cloud by day, smoke, and the brightness of a flaming fire by night; for over all the glory and brilliance will be a canopy [a defense, a covering of His divine love and protection]. 6And there will be a pavilion for shade from the heat by day, and a refuge and a shelter from the storm and the rain.

Isaiah 5
Parable Of The Vineyard
1Now let me sing for my greatly Beloved [LORD]
A song of my Beloved about His vineyard (His chosen people).
My greatly Beloved had a vineyard on a very fertile slope (the promised land, Canaan). 2He dug it all around and cleared away its stones,
And planted it with the choicest vine (the people of Judah).
And He built a tower in the center of it;
And also hewed out a wine vat in it.
Then He expected it to produce [the choicest] grapes,
But it produced only worthless ones. 3“And now, says the LORD, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,
Judge between Me and My vineyard (My people). 4“What more could have been done for My vineyard that I have not done in it?
When I expected it to produce good grapes, why did it yield worthless ones? 5“So now let me tell you what I am going to do to My vineyard:
I will take away its thorn-hedge, and it will be burned up;
I will break down its stone wall and it will be trampled down [by enemies]. 6“I will turn it into a wasteland;
It will not be pruned or cultivated,
But briars and thorns will come up.
I will also command the clouds not to rain on it.” 7For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house (nation) of Israel
And the men of Judah are His delightful planting [which He loves].
So He looked for justice, but in fact, [He saw] bloodshed and lawlessness;
[He looked] for righteousness, but in fact, [He heard] a cry of distress and oppression. Woes for the Wicked 8Woe (judgment is coming) to those who join house to house and join field to field [to increase their holdings by depriving others],
Until there is no more room [for others],
So that you have to live alone in the midst of the land! 9In my ears the LORD of hosts said, “Be assured that many houses will become desolate,
Even great and beautiful ones will be unoccupied. 10“For ten acres of vineyard will yield [only] one bath of wine,
And a homer (six bushels) of seed will produce [only] one ephah of grain.” 11Woe (judgment is coming) to those who rise early in the morning to pursue intoxicating drink,
Who stay up late in the night till wine inflames them! 12They have lyre and harp, tambourine and flute, and wine at their feasts;
But they do not regard nor even pay attention to the deeds of the LORD,
Nor do they consider the work of His hands. 13Therefore My people go into exile because they lack knowledge [of God];
And their honorable men are famished,
And their common people are parched with thirst. 14Therefore Sheol (the realm of the dead) has increased its appetite and opened its mouth beyond measure;
And Jerusalem’s splendor, her multitude, her [boisterous] uproar and her [drunken] revelers descend into it. 15So the common man will be bowed down and the man of importance degraded,
And the eyes of the proud (arrogant) will be degraded. 16But the LORD of hosts will be exalted in justice,
And God, the Holy One, will show Himself holy in righteousness [through His righteous judgments]. 17Then the lambs will graze [among the ruins] as in their own pasture,
And strangers will eat in the desolate places of the [exiled] wealthy. 18Woe (judgment is coming) to those who drag along wickedness with cords of falsehood,
And sin as if with cart ropes [towing their own punishment]; 19Who say, “Let Him move speedily, let Him expedite His work [His promised vengeance], so that we may see it;
And let the purpose of the Holy One of Israel approach
And come to pass, so that we may know it!” 20Woe (judgment is coming) to those who call evil good, and good evil;
Who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness;
Who substitute bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter! 21Woe (judgment is coming) to those who are wise in their own eyes
And clever and shrewd in their own sight! 22Woe (judgment is coming) to those who are heroes at drinking wine
And men of strength in mixing intoxicating drinks, 23Who justify the wicked and acquit the guilty for a bribe,
And take away the rights of those who are in the right! 24Therefore, as the tongue of fire consumes the stubble [from straw]
And the dry grass collapses into the flame,
So their root will become like rot and their blossom blow away like fine dust;
Because they have rejected the law of the LORD of hosts
And despised and discarded the word of the Holy One of Israel. 25Therefore the anger of the LORD has burned against His people,
And He has stretched out His hand against them and has struck them down.
And the mountains trembled, and their dead bodies lay like rubbish in the middle of the streets.
In spite of all this God’s anger is not turned away,
But His hand is still stretched out [in judgment]. 26He will lift up a flag to [call] the distant nations [to bring His judgment on Judah],
And will whistle for them from the ends of the earth;
And indeed, they will come with great speed swiftly. 27No one among them is weary or stumbles,
No one slumbers or sleeps;
Nor is the belt at their waist undone [as if unprepared for action],
Nor is the strap of their sandal broken. 28Their arrows are sharp and all their bows are strung and bent;
Their horses’ hoofs seem like flint and their chariot wheels like a whirlwind. 29Their roaring is like a lioness, they roar like young lions;
They growl and seize their prey
And carry it off and there is no one to save it. 30And in that day they will roar against them (Judah) like the roaring of the sea.
And if one looks to the land, in fact, there is darkness and distress;
Even the light will be darkened by its clouds.

Isaiah 6
Isaiah’s Vision
1In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw [in a vision] the Lord sitting on a throne, high and exalted, with the train of His royal robe filling the [most holy part of the] temple. 2Above Him seraphim (heavenly beings) stood; each one had six wings: with two wings he covered his face, with two wings he covered his feet, and with two wings he flew. 3And one called out to another, saying, “Holy, Holy, Holy is the LORD of hosts;
The whole earth is filled with His glory.”
4And the foundations of the thresholds trembled at the voice of him who called out, and the temple was filling with smoke. 5Then I said, “Woe is me! For I am ruined,
Because I am a man of [ceremonially] unclean lips,
And I live among a people of unclean lips;
For my eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts.”
6Then one of the seraphim flew to me with a burning coal in his hand, which he had taken from the altar with tongs. 7He touched my mouth with it and said, “Listen carefully, this has touched your lips; your wickedness [your sin, your injustice, your wrongdoing] is taken away and your sin atoned for and forgiven.” Isaiah’s Commission 8Then I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, “Whom shall I send, and who will go for Us?” Then I said, “Here am I. Send me!” 9And He said, “Go, and tell this people: ‘Keep on listening, but do not understand;
Keep on looking, but do not comprehend.’ 10“Make the heart of this people insensitive,
Their ears dull,
And their eyes dim,
Otherwise they might see with their eyes,
Hear with their ears,
Understand with their hearts,
And return and be healed.”
11Then I said, “Lord, how long?” And He answered, “Until cities are devastated and without inhabitant,
And houses are without people
And the land is utterly desolate, 12The LORD has removed [His] people far away,
And there are many deserted places in the midst of the land. 13“And though a tenth [of the people] remain in the land,
It will again be subject to destruction [consumed and burned],
Like a massive terebinth tree or like an oak
Whose stump remains when it is chopped down.
The holy seed [the elect remnant] is its stump [the substance of Israel].”

Isaiah 7
War Against Jerusalem
1Now it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin king of Aram (Syria) and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to wage war against it, but they could not conquer it. 2When the house of David (Judah) was told, “Aram is allied with Ephraim (Israel),” the hearts of Ahaz and his people trembled as the trees of the forest tremble in the wind.
3Then the LORD said to Isaiah, “Go out to meet Ahaz [king of Judah], you and your son Shear-jashub, at the end of the aqueduct of the Upper Pool, on the highway to the Fuller’s Field; 4and say to him, ‘Take care and be calm, do not fear and be weak-hearted because of these two stumps of smoldering logs, on account of the fierce anger of [King] Rezin and Aram and of the son of Remaliah (Pekah, usurper of the throne of Israel). 5‘Because Aram, along with Ephraim (Israel) and the son of Remaliah, have planned evil against you (Judah), saying, 6“Let us go up against Judah and terrorize it; and let us breach its wall and tear it apart [each of us taking a portion] and set up the son of Tabeel over it as its [puppet] king,” 7for this is what the Lord GOD says, “It shall not stand nor shall it happen. 8For the head (capital) of Aram is Damascus and the head of Damascus is [King] Rezin (now within sixty-five years Ephraim will be broken to pieces and will no longer be a people). 9“And the head (capital) of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah’s son [King Pekah]. If you will not believe [and trust in God and His message], be assured that you will not be established.”’”
The Child Immanuel 10Then the LORD spoke again to [King] Ahaz, saying, 11“Ask a sign for yourself from the LORD your God [one that will convince you that God has spoken and will keep His word]; make your request as deep as Sheol or as high as heaven.” 12But Ahaz said, “I will not ask, nor will I test the LORD!” 13Then Isaiah said, “Hear then, O house of David! Is it too small a thing for you to try the patience of men, but will you try the patience of my God as well? 14Therefore the Lord Himself will give you a sign: Listen carefully, the virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and she will call his name Immanuel (God with us). 15He will eat curds and honey when he knows enough to refuse evil and choose good. 16For before the child will know enough to refuse evil and choose good, the land (Canaan) whose two kings you dread will be deserted [both Ephraim and Aram]. Trials to Come for Judah 17“The LORD will bring on you, on your people, and on your father’s house such days as have not come since the day that Ephraim (the ten northern tribes) separated from Judah—[He will call for] the king of Assyria.”
18In that day the LORD will whistle for the fly that is in the mouth of the rivers and canals of Egypt and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. 19These [armies, like flies and bees] will all come and settle on the steep and rugged ravines and in the clefts of the rocks, and on all the thorn bushes and in all the watering places.
20In that day [when foreign armies swarm the land] the Lord will shave with a razor, hired from the regions beyond the Euphrates (that is, with the king of Assyria), [that razor will shave] the head and the hair of the legs; and it will also remove the beard [leaving Judah stripped, shamed and scorned].
21Now in that day [because of the poverty caused by the invaders] a man will keep alive only a young milk cow and two sheep; 22and because of the abundance of milk produced he will eat curds, for everyone that is left in the land will eat [only] curds and [wild] honey.
23And it will come to pass in that day, in every place where there used to be a thousand vines, worth a thousand silver shekels, there will be briars and thorns. 24People will come there [to hunt] with arrows and with bows because all the land will be briars and thorns. 25As for all the hills which used to be cultivated with the pick and the hoe, you will no longer go there for fear of briars and thorns; but they will become a place where oxen are pastured and where sheep tread.

Isaiah 8
Damascus And Samaria Fall
1Then the LORD said to me, “Take for yourself a large tablet [for public display] and write on it in ordinary characters: Belonging to Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 2“And I will get faithful witnesses to attest [to this prophecy] for me, Uriah the priest and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.” 3So I approached [my wife] the prophetess, and she conceived and gave birth to a son. Then the LORD said to me, “Name him Maher-shalal-hash-baz [to remind the people of the prophecy]; 4for before the boy knows how to say, ‘My father’ or ‘My mother,’ the riches of Damascus (Aram’s capital) and the spoil of Samaria (Israel’s capital) will be carried away by the king of Assyria.”
5Again the LORD spoke to me, saying, 6“Because these people (Judah) have refused the gently flowing waters of Shiloah
And rejoice in Rezin [the king of Aram] and Remaliah’s son [Pekah the king of Israel], 7Now therefore, listen carefully, the Lord is about to bring on them the waters of the [Euphrates] River, strong and abundant—
The king of Assyria and all his glory;
And it will rise over all its channels and canals and go far beyond its banks. 8“Then it will sweep on into Judah; it will overflow and pass through [the hills],
Reaching even to the neck [of which Jerusalem is the head],
And its outstretched wings (the armies of Assyria) will fill the width of Your land, O Immanuel. A Believing Remnant 9“Be broken [in pieces], O peoples, and be shattered!
Listen, all you [our enemies from the] far countries.
Prepare yourselves [for war], and be shattered;
Prepare yourselves [for war], and be shattered. 10“Take counsel together [against Judah], but it will come to nothing;
Speak the word, but it will not stand,
For God is with us (Immanuel).”
11For in this way the LORD spoke to me with His strong hand [upon me] and instructed me not to walk in the way of this people [behaving as they do], saying, 12“You are not to say, ‘It is a conspiracy!’
In regard to all that this people call a conspiracy,
And you are not to fear what they fear nor be in dread of it. 13“It is the LORD of hosts whom you are to regard as holy and awesome.
He shall be your fear,
He shall be your dread [not man]. 14“Then He shall be a sanctuary [a sacred, indestructible shelter for those who fear and trust Him];
But to both the houses of Israel [both the northern and southern kingdoms—Israel and Judah, He will be] a stone on which to stumble and a rock on which to trip,
A trap and a snare for the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 15“Many [among them] will stumble over them;
Then they will fall and be broken,
They will even be snared and trapped.”
16Bind up the testimony, seal the law and the teaching among my (Isaiah’s) disciples. 17And I will wait for the LORD who is hiding His face from the house of Jacob; and I will look eagerly for Him. 18Listen carefully, I and the children whom the LORD has given me are for signs and wonders [that will occur] in Israel from the LORD of hosts, who dwells on Mount Zion.
19When the people [instead of trusting God] say to you, “Consult the mediums [who try to talk to the dead] and the soothsayers who chirp and whisper and mutter,” should not a people consult their God? Should they consult the dead on behalf of the living? 20[Direct those people] to the law and to the testimony! If their teachings are not in accord with this word, it is because they have no dawn. 21They [who consult mediums and soothsayers] will pass through the land deeply distressed and hungry, and when they are hungry, they will become enraged and will curse their king and their God as they look upward. 22Then they will look to the earth, they will see only distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish; and they will be driven away into darkness and overwhelming night.

Isaiah 9
Birth And Reign Of The Prince Of Peace
1But there will be no more gloom for her who was in anguish [for with judgment comes the promise of salvation]. In earlier times He treated the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali with contempt, but later on He will make them honored [by the presence of the Messiah], by the way of the sea, on the other side of Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles. 2The people who walk in [spiritual] darkness
Will see a great Light;
Those who live in the dark land,
The Light will shine on them. 3You [O God] will increase the nation,
You will multiply their joy;
They will rejoice before You
Like the joy and jubilation of the harvest,
As men rejoice when they divide the spoil [of victory]. 4For You will break the yoke of Israel’s burden and the staff (goad) on their shoulders,
The rod of their oppressor, as at the battle of Midian. 5For every boot of the marching warrior in the battle tumult,
And [every soldier’s] garment rolled in blood, will be used for burning, fuel for the fire. 6For to us a Child shall be born, to us a Son shall be given;
And the government shall be upon His shoulder,
And His name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God,
Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. 7There shall be no end to the increase of His government and of peace,
[He shall rule] on the throne of David and over his kingdom,
To establish it and to uphold it with justice and righteousness
From that time forward and forevermore.
The zeal of the LORD of hosts will accomplish this. God’s Anger with Israel’s Arrogance 8The Lord sends a word (message) against Jacob,
And it falls on Israel [the ten northern tribes, the kingdom of Ephraim]. 9And all the people know it,
That is, Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria [its capital],
Who say in pride and arrogance of heart: 10“The bricks have fallen down,
But we will rebuild [all the better] with ashlar (hewed stones);
The sycamores have been cut down,
But we will replace them with [expensive] cedars.” 11Therefore the LORD raises against Ephraim adversaries from Rezin [king of Aram]
And spurs their enemies on, 12The Arameans on the east and the Philistines on the west;
And they devour Israel with gaping jaws.
In spite of all this, God’s anger does not turn away
But His hand is still stretched out [in judgment]. 13Yet the people do not turn back [in repentance] to Him who struck them,
Nor do they seek the LORD of hosts [as their most essential need]. 14Therefore the LORD cuts off head and tail [the highest and the lowest] from Israel,
Both [the high] palm branch and [the low] bulrush in one day. 15The elderly and honorable man, he is the head;
And the prophet who teaches lies, he is the tail. 16For those who lead this people are causing them to go astray;
And those who are led [astray] by them are swallowed up. 17Therefore the Lord does not rejoice over their young men,
Nor does He have compassion on their fatherless or their widows;
For every one of them is godless and an evildoer,
And every mouth is speaking foolishness.
In spite of all this, God’s anger does not turn away
But His hand is still stretched out [in judgment]. 18For wickedness burns like a fire;
It consumes briars and thorns,
It even sets the forest thickets ablaze;
And it swirls upward in a column of smoke. 19By the wrath of the LORD of hosts the land is burned up,
And the people are like fuel for the fire;
No man spares his brother. 20They slice off [in discord] what is on the right hand but are still hungry,
And they eat what is on the left hand but they are not satisfied;
Each eats the flesh of his own arm. 21[The tribe of] Manasseh devours [the tribe of his brother] Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh,
And together they are against Judah (the southern kingdom, the house of David).
In spite of all this, God’s anger does not turn away
But His hand is still stretched out [in judgment].

Isaiah 10
Assyria Is God’s Instrument
1Woe (judgment is coming) to those [judges] who issue evil statutes,
And to those [magistrates] who constantly record unjust and oppressive decisions, 2So as to deprive the needy of justice
And rob the poor of My people of rightful claims,
So that widows may be their spoil
And that they may plunder the fatherless. 3Now what will you do in the day of [God’s] punishment,
And in the storm of devastation which will come from far away?
To whom will you flee for help?
And where will you leave your wealth [for safekeeping]? 4Nothing remains but to crouch among the captives
Or fall [dead] among the slain [on the battlefield].
In spite of all this, God’s anger does not turn away,
But His hand is still stretched out [in judgment]. 5Woe to Assyria, the rod of My anger [against Israel],
The staff in whose hand is My indignation and fury [against Israel’s disobedience]! 6I send Assyria against a godless nation
And commission it against the people of My wrath
To take the spoil and to seize the plunder,
And to trample them down like mud in the streets. 7Yet it is not Assyria’s intention [to do My will],
Nor does it plan so in its heart,
But instead it is its purpose to destroy
And to cut off many nations. 8For Assyria says, “Are not my princes all kings? 9“Is not Calno [conquered] like Carchemish [on the Euphrates]?
Is not Hamath [subdued] like Arpad [her neighbor]?
Is not Samaria [in Israel] like Damascus [in Aram]? 10“As my hand has reached to the kingdoms of the idols,
Whose carved images were greater and more feared than those of Jerusalem and Samaria, 11Shall I not do to Jerusalem and her images
Just as I have done to Samaria and her idols?” [declares Assyria].
12So when the Lord has completed all His work [of judgment] on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem, He will say, “I will punish the fruit [the thoughts, the declarations, and the actions] of the arrogant heart of the king of Assyria and the haughtiness of his pride.” 13For the Assyrian king has said, “I have done this by the power of my [own] hand and by my wisdom,
For I have understanding and skill.
I have removed the boundaries of the peoples
And have plundered their treasures;
Like a bull I have brought down those who sat on thrones. 14“My hand has found the wealth of the people like a nest,
And as one gathers eggs that are abandoned, so I have gathered all the earth;
And there was not one that flapped its wing, or that opened its beak and chirped.” 15Is the axe able to lift itself over the one who chops with it?
Is the saw able to magnify itself over the one who wields it?
That would be like a club moving those who lift it,
Or like a staff raising him who is not [made of] wood [like itself]! 16Therefore the Lord, the GOD of hosts, will send a wasting disease among the stout warriors of Assyria;
And under his glory a fire will be kindled like a burning flame. 17And the Light of Israel will become a fire and His Holy One a flame,
And it will burn and devour Assyria’s thorns and briars in a single day. 18The Lord will consume the glory of Assyria’s forest and of its fruitful garden, both soul and body,
And it will be as when a sick man wastes away. 19And the remaining trees of Assyria’s forest will be so few in number
That a child could write them down.
A Remnant Will Return 20Now in that day the remnant of Israel, and those of the house of Jacob who have escaped, will never again rely on the one who struck them, but will truly rely on the LORD, the Holy One of Israel. 21A remnant will return, a remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God. 22For though your people, O Israel, may be as the sand of the sea,
Only a remnant within them will return;
The destruction is determined [it is decided and destined for completion], overflowing with justice (righteous punishment).
23For the Lord, the GOD of hosts, will execute a complete destruction, one that is decreed, in the midst of all the land.
24Therefore, the Lord GOD of hosts says this, “O My people who dwell in Zion, do not be afraid of the Assyrian who strikes you with a rod and lifts up his staff against you, as [the king of] Egypt did. 25“For yet a very little while and My indignation [against you] will be fulfilled and My anger will be directed toward the destruction of the Assyrian.” 26The LORD of hosts will brandish a whip against them like the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb; and His staff will be over the [Red] Sea and He will lift it up the way He did in [the flight from] Egypt. 27So it will be in that day, that the burden of the Assyrian will be removed from your shoulders and his yoke from your neck. The yoke will be broken because of the fat. 28The Assyrian has come against Aiath [in Judah],
He has passed through Migron [with his army];
At Michmash he stored his equipment. 29They have gone through the pass, saying,
“Geba will be our lodging place for the night.”
Ramah trembles, and Gibeah [the city] of Saul has fled. 30Cry aloud with your voice [in consternation], O Daughter of Gallim!
Pay attention, Laishah! Answer her, Anathoth! 31Madmenah has fled;
The inhabitants of Gebim have fled [with their belongings] to safety. 32Yet today the Assyrian will halt at Nob [the city of priests];
He shakes his fist at the mountain of the Daughter of Zion, at the hill of Jerusalem. 33Listen carefully, the Lord, the GOD of hosts, will lop off the [beautiful] boughs with terrifying force;
The tall in stature will be cut down
And the lofty will be abased and humiliated. 34He will cut down the thickets of the forest with an iron axe,
And Lebanon (the Assyrian) will fall by the Mighty One.

Isaiah 11
Righteous Reign Of The Branch
1Then a Shoot (the Messiah) will spring from the stock of Jesse [David’s father],
And a Branch from his roots will bear fruit. 2And the Spirit of the LORD will rest on Him—
The Spirit of wisdom and understanding,
The Spirit of counsel and strength,
The Spirit of knowledge and of the [reverential and obedient] fear of the LORD— 3And He will delight in the fear of the LORD,
And He will not judge by what His eyes see,
Nor make decisions by what His ears hear; 4But with righteousness and justice He will judge the poor,
And decide with fairness for the downtrodden of the earth;
And He shall strike the earth with the rod of His mouth,
And with the breath of His lips He shall slay the wicked. 5And righteousness will be the belt around His loins,
And faithfulness the belt around His waist. 6And the wolf will dwell with the lamb,
And the leopard will lie down with the young goat,
And the calf and the young lion and the fatted steer together;
And a little child will lead them. 7And the cow and the bear will graze [together],
Their young will lie down together,
And the lion shall eat straw like the ox. 8And the nursing child will [safely] play over the hole of the cobra,
And the weaned child will put his hand on the viper’s den [and not be hurt]. 9They will not hurt or destroy in all My holy mountain,
For the earth will be full of the knowledge of the LORD
As the waters cover the sea. 10Then in that day
The nations will make supplications to the Root of Jesse
Who will stand as a signal for the peoples;
And His resting place will be glorious. The Restored Remnant 11Then it will happen on that day that the Lord
Will again acquire with His hand a second time
The remnant of His people, who will remain,
From Assyria, from [Lower] Egypt, from Pathros, from Cush (Ethiopia), from Elam [in Persia], from Shinar [Babylonia], from Hamath [in Aram],
And from the coastlands bordering the [Mediterranean] Sea. 12And He will lift up a signal for the nations
And assemble the outcasts of Israel,
And will gather the dispersed of Judah
From the four corners of the earth. 13Then the jealousy of Ephraim will depart,
And those who harass Judah will be cut off;
Ephraim will not be jealous of Judah,
And Judah will not harass Ephraim. 14Ephraim and Judah will [unite and] swoop down on the slopes of the Philistines toward the west;
Together they will plunder the sons (Arabs) of the east.
They will possess Edom and Moab,
And the sons of Ammon will be subject to them. 15And the LORD will utterly destroy
The tongue of the Sea of Egypt;
And with His scorching wind
He will wave His hand over the River;
He will strike and divide it into seven channels
And make [it possible for] people [to] walk over in sandals. 16And there will be a highway from Assyria
For the remnant of His people who will be left,
Just as there was for Israel
In the day when they came up out of the land of Egypt.

Isaiah 12
Thanksgiving Expressed
1And on that day you will say,
“I will give thanks to You, O LORD;
For though You were angry with me,
Your anger has turned away,
And You comfort me. 2“Behold, God, my salvation!
I will trust and not be afraid,
For the LORD GOD is my strength and song;
Yes, He has become my salvation.” 3Therefore with joy you will draw water
From the springs of salvation. 4And in that day you will say,
“Give thanks to the LORD, call on His name [in prayer].
Make His deeds known among the peoples [of the earth];
Proclaim [to them] that His name is exalted!” 5Sing praises to the LORD, for He has done excellent and glorious things;
Let this be known throughout the earth. 6Rejoice and shout for joy, O inhabitant of Zion,
For great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel.

Isaiah 13
Prophecies About Babylon
1The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning Babylon which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw [in a prophetic vision]: 2Lift up a signal banner on the bare mountain,
Summon them [the Medes and Persians] with a loud voice,
Wave the [beckoning] hand so that they may enter the doorways of the [Babylonian] nobles. 3I [the LORD] have commanded My consecrated ones,
I have even called My great warriors,
My proudly exulting ones [the Medes and the Persians who triumph for My honor]—
To execute My anger. 4A sound of tumult on the mountains,
Like that of many people!
A sound of the uproar of the kingdoms,
Of nations gathered together!
The LORD of hosts is mustering an army for battle. 5They are coming from a distant country,
From the end of heaven [the farthest horizon]—
The LORD and the weapons of His indignation—
To destroy the whole land. Judgment on the Day of the LORD 6Wail, for the day of the LORD is at hand!
It will come as destruction from the Almighty (All Sufficient One—Invincible God)! 7Therefore all hands will fall limp,
And every man’s heart will melt. 8They [of Babylon] will be shocked and terrified,
Pains and anguish will grip them;
They will be in pain like a woman in childbirth.
They will stare aghast and horrified at one another,
Their faces aflame [from the effects of the unprecedented warfare]. 9Listen carefully, the day of the LORD is coming,
Cruel, with wrath and raging anger,
To make the land a horror [of devastation];
And He shall exterminate its sinners from it. 10For the stars of heaven and their constellations
Will not flash with their light;
The sun will be dark when it rises,
And the moon will not shed its light. 11In this way I will punish the world for its evil
And the wicked for their wickedness [their sin, their injustice, their wrongdoing];
I will also put an end to the arrogance of the proud
And will abase the arrogance of the tyrant. 12I will make mortal man more rare than fine gold,
And mankind [scarcer] than the pure gold of Ophir. 13Therefore I will make the heavens tremble;
And the earth will be shaken from its place
At the wrath of the LORD of hosts
In the day of His burning anger. 14And like the hunted gazelle,
Or like sheep that no man gathers,
Each [foreign resident] will turn [and go back] to his own people,
And each one flee to his own land. 15Anyone who is found will be pierced through,
And anyone who is captured will fall by the sword. 16Their children also will be smashed to pieces
Before their eyes;
Their houses will be looted
And their wives ravished. Babylon Will Fall to the Medes 17Listen carefully, I will put the Medes [in motion] against them,
Who have no regard for silver and do not delight in gold [and therefore cannot be bribed]. 18Their bows will cut down the young men [of Babylon];
They will take no pity on the fruit of the womb,
Their eyes will not look with compassion on the children. 19And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldeans’ pride,
Will be like Sodom and Gomorrah when God overthrew them. 20Babylon will never be inhabited or lived in from generation to generation;
Nor will the Arab pitch his tent there,
Nor will the shepherds let their sheep lie down there. 21But desert creatures will lie down there,
And their houses will be full of owls;
Ostriches also will live there, and wild goats will dance there. 22Hyenas will howl in their castles,
And jackals in their luxurious palaces.
Babylon’s time has nearly come,
And her days will not be prolonged.

Isaiah 14
Israel’s Taunt
1For the LORD will have compassion on Jacob (the captives in Babylon) and will again choose Israel, and will settle them in their own land. Foreigners (Gentiles) will join them [as proselytes] and will attach themselves to the house of Jacob (Israel). 2The peoples will take them along and bring them to their own place (Judea), and the house of Israel will possess them as an inheritance in the land of the LORD as male and female servants; and they will take captive those whose captives they have been, and they will rule over their [former] oppressors.
3And it will be in the day when the LORD gives you rest from your pain and turmoil and from the harsh service in which you have been enslaved, 4that you will take up this taunt against the king of Babylon, and say, “How the oppressor has ceased [his insolence],
And how the fury has ceased! 5“The LORD has broken the staff of the wicked,
The scepter of the [tyrant] rulers 6Which used to strike the peoples in anger with incessant blows,
Which subdued and ruled the nations in wrath with unrelenting persecution. 7“The whole earth is at rest and is quiet;
They break into shouts of joy. 8“Even the cypress trees rejoice over you [kings of Babylon], even the cedars of Lebanon, saying,
‘Since you were laid low, no woodcutter comes up against us.’ 9“Sheol below is excited about you to meet you when you come [you tyrant of Babylon];
It stirs up the spirits of the dead [to greet you], all the leaders of the earth;
It raises all the kings of the nations from their thrones [in astonishment at your fall]. 10“All of them will respond [tauntingly] and say to you,
‘You have become as weak as we are.
You have become like us. 11‘Your pomp and magnificence have been brought down to Sheol,
Along with the music of your harps;
The maggots [which prey on the dead] are spread out under you [as a bed]
And worms are your covering [Babylonian rulers].’ 12“How you have fallen from heaven,
O star of the morning [light-bringer], son of the dawn!
You have been cut down to the ground,
You who have weakened the nations [king of Babylon]! 13“But you said in your heart,
‘I will ascend to heaven;
I will raise my throne above the stars of God;
I will sit on the mount of assembly
In the remote parts of the north. 14‘I will ascend above the heights of the clouds;
I will make myself like the Most High.’ 15“But [in fact] you will be brought down to Sheol,
To the remote recesses of the pit (the region of the dead). 16“Those who see you will gaze at you,
They will consider you, saying,
‘Is this the man who made the earth tremble,
Who shook kingdoms, 17Who made the world like a wilderness
And overthrew its cities,
Who did not permit his prisoners to return home?’ 18“All the kings of the nations, all of them lie [dead] in glorious array,
Each one in his own sepulcher. 19“But you [king of Babylon] have been cast out of your tomb (denied burial)
Like a rejected branch,
Clothed with the slain who are pierced by the sword,
Who go down to the stones of the pit [into which carcasses are thrown],
Like a dead body trampled [underfoot]. 20“You will not be united with them in burial,
Because you have destroyed your land,
You have slain your people.
May the descendants of evildoers never be named! 21“Prepare a slaughtering place for his sons
Because of the wickedness [the sin, the injustice, the wrongdoing] of their fathers.
They must not rise and take possession of the earth,
And fill the face of the world with cities.”
22“I will rise up against them,” says the LORD of hosts, “and will cut off from Babylon name and survivors, and son and grandson,” declares the LORD. 23“I will also make Babylon a possession of the hedgehog and of swamps of water, and I will sweep it away with the broom of destruction,” declares the LORD of hosts. Judgment on Assyria 24The LORD of hosts has sworn [an oath], saying, “Just as I have intended, so it has certainly happened, and just as I have planned, so it will stand— 25to break the Assyrian in My land, and on My mountains I will trample him underfoot. Then the Assyrian’s yoke will be removed from them (the people of Judah) and his burden removed from their shoulder. 26This is the plan [of God] decided for the whole earth [regarded as conquered and put under tribute by Assyria]; and this is the hand [of God] that is stretched out over all the nations. 27“For the LORD of hosts has decided and planned, and who can annul it? His hand is stretched out, and who can turn it back?”
Judgment on Philistia 28In the year that King Ahaz [of Judah] died this [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) came: 29“Do not rejoice, O Philistia, any of you,
Because the rod [of Judah] that struck you is broken;
For out of the serpent’s root will come a viper [King Hezekiah of Judah],
And its offspring will be a flying serpent. 30“The firstborn of the helpless [of Judah] will feed [on My meadows],
And the needy will lie down in safety;
But I will kill your root with famine,
And your survivors will be put to death. 31“Howl, O gate; cry, O city!
Melt away, O Philistia, all of you;
For smoke comes out of the north,
And there is no straggler in his ranks and no one stands detached [in Hezekiah’s battalions]. 32“Then what answer will one give the messengers of the [Philistine] nation?
That the LORD has founded Zion,
And the afflicted of His people will seek and find refuge in it.”

Isaiah 15
Judgment On Moab
1The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning Moab: Because in a night Ar of Moab is devastated and ruined;
Because in a night Kir of Moab is devastated and ruined. 2They have gone up to the temple and to Dibon, to the high places to weep.
Moab wails over Nebo and over Medeba;
Everyone’s head is shaved, and every beard is cut off [in mourning]. 3In their streets they have wrapped themselves with sackcloth;
On their [flat] housetops and in their open squares
Everyone is wailing, dissolved in tears. 4Heshbon and Elealeh [cities claimed by Moab] cry out;
Their voice is heard as far as Jahaz.
Therefore the armed men of Moab cry out;
Moab’s soul trembles within him. 5My heart cries out for Moab;
His fugitives are [fleeing] as far as Zoar and Eglath-shelishiyah.
For they go up the ascent of Luhith weeping;
For on the road to Horonaim they raise a cry of distress over their destruction. 6For the waters of Nimrim are desolate.
Indeed the grass is withered, the new growth dies;
There is no green thing. 7Therefore the abundance which they have acquired and stored away
They carry off over the Brook of the Willows. 8For the cry of distress has echoed around the territory of Moab;
The wailing goes as far as Eglaim and the mournful cry to Beer-elim. 9For the waters of Dimon are full of blood;
Yet I will bring even more woes on Dimon—
A lion upon those of Moab who escape and upon the remnant of the land.

Isaiah 16
Prophecy Of Moab’s Devastation
1Send lambs to the ruler of the land [you Moabites],
From Sela [that is, Petra in Edom] through the wilderness to the mountain of the Daughter of Zion (Jerusalem). 2For like wandering birds or scattered nestlings,
The daughters of Moab will be at the fords of the [river] Arnon. 3[Say to the ruler] “Give us advice, make a decision [for Moab, king of Judah];
Cast your shadow [over us] like night in the midst of noon;
Hide the outcasts, do not betray the fugitive [to his pursuer]. 4“Let our outcasts of Moab live among you;
Be a [sheltered] hiding place to them from the destroyer.”
For the extortioner has come to an end, destruction has ceased,
Oppressors [who trample men] have completely disappeared from the land, 5A throne will be established in lovingkindness,
And One will sit on it in faithfulness in the tent (dynasty, family) of David;
Judging and seeking justice
And being prompt to do righteousness. 6We have heard of the pride of Moab, an excessive pride—
Even of his arrogance, his conceit, his rage,
His untruthful boasting. 7Therefore Moab will wail for Moab; everyone will wail.
You will mourn for the raisin cakes of Kir-hareseth,
As those who are utterly stricken and discouraged. 8For the fields of Heshbon have languished and withered, and the vines of Sibmah as well;
The lords of the nations have trampled down [Moab’s] choice vine branches,
Which reached as far as Jazer and wandered into the wilderness;
Its tendrils stretched out, they passed over [the shores of] the [Dead] Sea. 9Therefore I (Isaiah) will weep bitterly for Jazer, for the vines of Sibmah.
I will drench you with my tears, O Heshbon and Elealeh;
For the war-cry [of the enemy] has fallen on your summer fruits and your harvest. 10Gladness and joy are taken away from the fruitful field;
In the vineyards there will be no singing or joyful sound;
No treader treads out wine in the presses,
For I (God) put an end to the joyful shouting. 11Therefore my heart sounds like a harp [in mournful compassion] for Moab,
And my inner being mourns for Kir-hareseth. 12So it will come to pass when Moab presents himself,
When he wearies himself [worshiping] on his high place [of idolatry]
And comes to his sanctuary [of Chemosh, god of Moab] to pray,
That he will not prevail.
13This is the word which the LORD spoke earlier concerning Moab [when Moab’s pride and resistance to God were first known]. 14But now the LORD speaks, saying, “Within three years, as the years of a hired man [who will not serve longer than the agreed time], the glory of Moab will be degraded along with all the great population, and the remnant [that survives] will be very small and of no account.”

Isaiah 17
Prophecy About Damascus
1The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning Damascus [capital of Aram (Syria), and Israel’s defense against Assyria]. “Listen carefully, Damascus will cease to be a city
And will become a fallen ruin. 2“The cities of Aroer [east of the Jordan] are deserted;
They will be [only a refuge] for flocks to lie down in,
And there will be no one to make them afraid. 3“The fortified city will disappear from Ephraim,
And the kingdom from Damascus
And the remnant of Aram (Syria);
They will be like the [departed] glory of [her ally] the children of Israel,”
Declares the LORD of hosts. 4“Now in that day the [former] glory of Jacob [Israel—his might, his population, his prosperity] will fade,
And the fatness of his flesh will become lean. 5“And it will be like the reaper gathering the standing grain,
As his arm harvests the ears of grain;
Yes, it will be like one gleaning ears of grain
In the [fertile] Valley of Rephaim. 6“Yet gleanings will be left in the land [of Israel] like the shaking of the olive tree,
Two or three olives on the topmost branch,
Four or five on the [outermost] branches of the fruitful tree,”
Declares the LORD, the God of Israel. 7In that day man will have regard for his Maker,
And his eyes will regard the Holy One of Israel [with awe-inspired reverence]. 8And he will not have regard for the [idolatrous] altars, the work of his hands,
Nor will he look to that which his fingers have made,
Neither the Asherim (symbols of the goddess Asherah) nor the incense altars. 9In that day the strong cities of Aram and Israel will be like deserted places in the forest,
Or like branches which they abandoned before the children of Israel;
And the land will be a desolation. 10Because you [Judah] have forgotten the God of your salvation
And have not remembered the Rock of your Stronghold—
Therefore you plant lovely plants
And set the grounds with vine slips of a strange god, 11In the day that you plant it you carefully fence it in,
And in the morning you bring your seed to blossom;
Yet [promising as it is] the harvest will be a heap [of ruins that passes away]
In the day of sickness and incurable pain. 12Oh, the uproar of many peoples
Who roar like the roaring of the seas,
And the noise of nations
Who roar like the rumbling of mighty waters! 13The nations roar on like the roaring of many waters,
But God will rebuke them and they will flee far away,
And be chased like chaff on the mountains before the wind,
Or like whirling dust before the storm. 14At evening time, now look, sudden terror!
Before morning the Assyrians are no more.
This is the portion (fate) of those who plunder us,
And the lot of those who pillage us.

Isaiah 18
Message To Ethiopia
1Woe (judgment is coming) to the land of whirring wings
Which is beyond the rivers of Cush (Ethiopia), 2Which sends ambassadors by the sea,
Even in vessels of papyrus on the surface of the waters.
Go, swift messengers, to a nation [of people] tall and smooth (clean shaven),
To a people feared far and wide,
A powerful and oppressive nation
Whose land the rivers divide. 3All you inhabitants of the world, you who dwell on the earth,
When a banner is raised on the mountains, you will see it!
When a trumpet is blown, you will hear it!
4For this is what the LORD has said to me, “I will be quiet and I will look on from My dwelling place,
Like shimmering heat above the sunshine,
Like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.” 5For before the harvest, when the blossom is over
And the flower becomes a ripening grape,
He will cut off the sprigs [without buds] with pruning knives,
And [He will] remove and cut away the spreading branches. 6They (warriors) will be left together for the mountain birds of prey,
And for the beasts of the earth;
And the birds of prey will [spend the] summer feeding on them,
And all the beasts of the earth will spend harvest time on them. 7At that time a gift of homage will be brought to the LORD of hosts
From a people tall and smooth (clean shaven),
From a people feared far and wide,
A powerful and oppressive nation,
Whose land the rivers divide—
To the place [of worship] of the name of the LORD of hosts, to Mount Zion [in Jerusalem].

Isaiah 19
Message To Egypt
1The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning Egypt: Listen carefully, the LORD is riding on a swift cloud and is about to come to Egypt;
The idols of Egypt will tremble at His presence,
And the heart of the Egyptians will melt within them. 2“So I will provoke Egyptians against Egyptians;
And they will fight, each one against his brother and each one against his neighbor,
City against city, kingdom against kingdom. 3“Then the spirit of the Egyptians will become exhausted within them and emptied out;
And I will confuse their strategy,
So that they will consult the idols and the spirits of the dead,
And mediums and soothsayers. 4“And I will hand over the Egyptians to a hard and cruel master,
And a mighty king will rule over them,” declares the Lord GOD of hosts. 5The waters from the sea will dry up,
And the river will be parched and dry. 6The canals will become foul-smelling,
The streams of Egypt will thin out and dry up,
The reeds and the rushes will rot away. 7The meadows by the Nile, by the edge of the Nile,
And all the sown fields of the Nile
Will become dry, be blown away, and be no more. 8The fishermen will lament (cry out in grief),
And all those who cast a hook into the Nile will mourn,
And those who spread nets upon the waters will languish. 9Moreover, those who make linen from combed flax
And those who weave white cloth will be ashamed. 10[Those who are] the pillars and foundations of Egypt will be crushed;
And all those who work for wages will be grieved in soul. 11The princes of Zoan are complete fools;
The counsel of the Pharaoh’s wisest advisors has become stupid.
How can you say to Pharaoh,
“I am a son of the wise, a son of ancient kings?” 12Where then are your wise men?
Please let them tell you,
And let them understand what the LORD of hosts
Has purposed against Egypt [if they can]. 13The princes of Zoan have acted like fools,
The princes of Memphis are deluded [and entertain false hope];
Those who are the cornerstone of her tribes
Have led Egypt astray. 14The LORD has mixed a spirit of distortion within her;
Her leaders have caused Egypt to stagger in all that she does,
As a drunken man staggers in his vomit. 15There will be no work for Egypt
Which head or tail, [high] palm branch or [low] bulrush, may do.
16In that day the Egyptians will become like [helpless] women, and they will tremble and be frightened because of the waving of the hand of the LORD of hosts, which He is going to wave over them. 17The land of Judah [Assyria’s ally] will become a terror to the Egyptians; everyone to whom Judah is mentioned will be in dread of it, because of the purpose of the LORD of hosts which He is planning against Egypt.
18In that day five cities in the land of Egypt will speak the language of [the Hebrews of] Canaan and swear allegiance to the LORD of hosts. One [of them] will be called the City of Destruction.
19In that day there will be an altar to the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a memorial stone to the LORD near its border. 20It will become a sign and a witness to the LORD of hosts in the land of Egypt; for they will cry to the LORD because of oppressors, and He will send them a Savior, a [Great] Defender, and He will rescue them. 21And so the LORD will make Himself known to Egypt, and the Egyptians will know [heed, honor, and cherish] the LORD in that day. They will even worship with sacrifices [of animals] and offerings [of produce]; they will make a vow to the LORD and fulfill it. 22The LORD will strike Egypt, striking but healing it; so they will return to the LORD, and He will respond to them and heal them.
23In that day there will be a highway from Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrians will come into Egypt and the Egyptians into Assyria; and the Egyptians will worship and serve [the LORD] with the Assyrians.
24In that day Israel will be the third party with Egypt and with Assyria [in a Messianic league], a blessing in the midst of the earth, 25whom the LORD of hosts has blessed, saying, “Blessed is Egypt My people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel My heritage.”

Isaiah 20
Prophecy About Egypt And Cush (Ancient Ethiopia)
1In the year that the Tartan [the Assyrian commander in chief] came to Ashdod [in Philistia], when Sargon king of Assyria sent him and he fought against Ashdod and captured it, 2at that time the LORD spoke through Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, “Go, untie the sackcloth from your hips and take your sandals off your feet.” And he did so, walking around stripped [to his loincloth] and barefoot. 3And the LORD said, “Even as My servant Isaiah has walked stripped and barefoot for three years as a sign and forewarning concerning Egypt and Cush (Ethiopia), 4in the same way the king of Assyria will lead away the Egyptian captives and the Cushite exiles, young and old, stripped and barefoot, even with buttocks uncovered—to the shame of Egypt. 5Then they will be dismayed and ashamed because of Cush their hope and Egypt their boast. 6“So the inhabitants of this coastland [the Israelites and their neighbors] will say in that day, ‘Look what has happened to those in whom we hoped and trusted and to whom we fled for help to be spared from the king of Assyria! But we, how will we escape [captivity and exile]?’”

Isaiah 21
God Commands That Babylon Be Taken
1The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning the Desert of the Sea (the seasonally flooded plains just south of Babylon): As windstorms in the Negev (the South) sweep through,
So it (God’s judgment) comes from the desert, from [the hostile armies of] a terrifying land. 2A harsh vision has been shown to me;
The treacherous one deals treacherously, and the destroyer destroys.
Go up, Elam! Lay siege, Media!
All the groaning [caused by Babylon’s ruthless oppressions] I [the LORD] have brought to an end. 3Therefore [continues Isaiah] my loins are filled with anguish;
Pains have seized me like the pains of a woman in childbirth;
I am so bent and bewildered that I cannot hear, I am so terrified that I cannot see. 4My mind reels, horror overwhelms me;
The twilight I longed for has been turned into fear and trembling for me. 5They set the table [for the doomed banquet], they spread out the cloth, they eat, they drink;
“Rise up, captains [of Belshazzar’s court], oil your shields [for battle, for your enemy is at the gates]!”
6This is what the Lord says to me, “Go, station the lookout, let him report what he sees. 7“When he sees a chariot, horsemen in pairs,
A train of donkeys and a train of camels,
Let him pay attention and listen closely, very closely.”
8And the lookout called like a lion, “O Lord, I stand continually on the watchtower by day,
And I am stationed every night at my guard post. 9“Now look! Here comes a troop of riders, horsemen in pairs.”
And one said, “Fallen, fallen is Babylon;
And all the carved images of her gods are shattered on the ground.” 10O my threshed people [Judah, who must be judged and trampled down by Babylon], my afflicted of the threshing floor.
What I have heard from the LORD of hosts,
The God of Israel, I have [joyfully] announced to you [that Babylon is to fall].
Oracles about Edom and Arabia 11The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning Dumah (Edom): Someone keeps calling to me from Seir (Edom),
“Watchman, what is left of the night [of Assyrian oppression]?
Watchman, what is left of the night? [How long until morning?]” 12The watchman says,
“The morning comes [only briefly], but also [comes] the night [of Babylonian oppression].
If you would ask [of me then], ask [again, if Edom really wishes to know];
Come back again.”
13The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning Arabia: In the thickets of Arabia you must spend the night,
Caravans of Dedanites. 14Bring water for the thirsty [Dedanites],
O inhabitants of the land of Tema [in Arabia];
Meet the fugitive with bread. 15For they have fled from the swords,
From the drawn sword, from the bent bow
And from the press of battle and grief of war.
16For the Lord has said this to me, “Within a year, according to the years of a hired man [who will work no longer than was agreed], all the splendor of [the tribe of] Kedar will end; 17and the remainder of the number of archers, the mighty men of the sons of Kedar, will be few; for the LORD, the God of Israel, has spoken.”

Isaiah 22
The Valley Of Vision
1The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning the Valley of Vision: What is the matter with you now, that you have all gone up to the housetops, 2You [Jerusalem] who were full of noise,
A tumultuous city, a joyous and exuberant city;
Your slain were not slain [in a glorious death] with the sword,
Nor did they die in battle. 3All your leaders have fled together [with your king],
And have been captured without the bow [which they had thrown away];
All of you who were found were taken captive together,
Though they had fled far away. 4Therefore I say, “Look away from me;
Let me weep bitterly.
Do not try to comfort me over the destruction of the daughter of my people.” 5For the Lord GOD of hosts has a day of panic and of tumult, of trampling, of confusion
In the Valley of Vision,
A [day of] breaking down walls
And a crying [for help] to the mountain. 6Elam took up the quiver
With the chariots, infantry and horsemen;
And Kir uncovered the shield. 7And it came to pass that your choicest valleys were full of chariots,
And the horsemen took their fixed positions [in an offensive array] at the gate [of Jerusalem]. 8Then God removed the [protective] covering of Judah;
And in that day you looked to the weapons of the House of the Forest (Solomon’s armory). 9You saw that the breaches
In the wall of the City of David [the citadel of Zion] were many;
You collected [within the city’s walls] the waters of the Lower Pool (Siloam). 10Then you counted the houses of Jerusalem
And you tore down the houses [to get materials] to fortify the city wall [by extending it]. 11You also made a reservoir between the two walls
For the waters of the Old Pool,
But you did not look to its Maker,
Nor did you recognize Him who planned it long ago. 12Therefore in that day the Lord GOD of hosts called you to weeping, to mourning,
To shaving the head and to wearing sackcloth [in humiliation]. 13Instead, there is joy and jubilation,
Killing of oxen and slaughtering of sheep,
Eating meat and drinking wine, saying,
“Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we may die.” 14But the LORD of hosts revealed Himself in my ears,
“This sin absolutely will not be forgiven you
Until you die,” says the Lord GOD of hosts. 15For the Lord GOD of hosts says this, “Go to this [contemptible] steward,
To Shebna, who is in charge of the royal household [but is building himself a tomb worthy of a king, and say to him], 16‘What business do you have here?
And whom do you have here,
That you have hewn out a tomb here for yourself,
You who hew a sepulcher on the height,
You who carve a resting place for yourself in the rock? 17‘Listen carefully, the LORD is about to hurl you away violently, O man;
And He is about to grasp you firmly 18And roll you up tightly like a ball
And toss you into a vast country;
There you will die
And there your splendid chariots will be,
You shame of your master’s house.’ 19“I will depose you from your office,
And you will be pulled down from your position [of importance]. 20“Then it will come to pass in that day
That I will summon My servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah. 21“And I will clothe him with your tunic [of distinction]
And tie your sash securely around him.
I will entrust him with your authority;
He will become a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. 22“Then I will set on his shoulder the key of the house of David;
When he opens no one will shut,
When he shuts no one will open. 23“I will drive him like a peg in a firm place,
And he will become a throne of honor and glory to his father’s house.
24“So they will hang on him all the honor and glory [the complete responsibility] of his father’s house, offspring and issue [of the family, high and low], all the least of the articles, from the bowls to all the jars. 25“In that day,” declares the LORD of hosts, “the peg (Eliakim) that was driven into the firm place will give way; it will even break off and fall, and the burden hanging on it will be cut off, for the LORD has spoken.”

Isaiah 23
The Fall Of Tyre
1The [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning Tyre: Wail, O ships of Tarshish,
For Tyre is destroyed, without house, without harbor;
It is reported to them from the land of Cyprus (Kittim). 2Be silent, you inhabitants of the coastland,
You merchants of Sidon;
Your messengers crossed the sea 3And they were on great waters.
The grain of the Shihor, the harvest of the Nile River, was Tyre’s revenue;
And she was the market of nations. 4Be ashamed, O Sidon [mother-city of Tyre, now like a widow bereaved of her children];
For the sea speaks, the stronghold of the sea, saying,
“I have neither labored nor given birth [to children];
I have neither brought up young men nor reared virgins.” 5When the report reaches Egypt,
They will be in agony at the report about Tyre. 6Cross over to Tarshish [to seek safety as exiles];
Wail, O inhabitants of the coastland [of Tyre]. 7Is this your jubilant city,
Whose origin dates back to antiquity,
Whose feet used to carry her [far away] to colonize distant places? 8Who has planned this against Tyre, the bestower of crowns,
Whose merchants were princes, whose traders were the honored of the earth? 9The LORD of hosts has planned it, to defile the pride of all beauty,
To bring into contempt and humiliation all the honored of the earth. 10Overflow your land like [the overflow of] the Nile, O Daughter of Tarshish;
There is no more restraint [on you to make you pay tribute to Tyre]. 11He has stretched out His hand over the sea,
He has shaken the kingdoms;
The LORD has given a command concerning Canaan to destroy her strongholds and her fortresses [like Tyre and Sidon]. 12He has said, “You shall never again exult [in triumph], O crushed Virgin Daughter of Sidon.
Arise, cross over to Cyprus; even there you will find no rest.”
13Now look at the land of the Chaldeans (Babylonia)—this is the people which was not; the Assyrians allocated Tyre for desert creatures—they set up their siege towers, they stripped its palaces, they made it a ruin. 14Wail, O ships of Tarshish,
For your stronghold [of Tyre] is destroyed.
15Now in that day Tyre will be forgotten for seventy years, like the days of one king. At the end of seventy years it will happen to Tyre as in the prostitute’s song: 16Take a harp, walk around the city,
O forgotten prostitute;
Play the strings skillfully, sing many songs,
That you may be remembered.
17It will come to pass at the end of seventy years that the LORD will remember Tyre. Then she will return to her prostitute’s wages and will play the [role of a] prostitute [by trading] with all the kingdoms on the face of the earth. 18But her commercial gain and her prostitute’s wages will be dedicated to the LORD; it will not be treasured or stored up, but her commercial gain will become sufficient food and stately clothing for those who dwell (minister) in the presence of the LORD.

Isaiah 24
Judgment On The Earth
1Behold, the LORD lays waste to the earth, devastates it, twists and distorts its face and scatters its inhabitants. 2And the people will be like the priest, the servant like his master, the maid like her mistress, the buyer like the seller, the lender like the borrower, the creditor like the debtor [as God’s impartial judgment of sin comes on all]. 3The earth will be completely laid waste and utterly pillaged, for the LORD has spoken this word. 4The earth dries up and crumbles away, the world dries out and crumbles away, the exalted of the people of the earth fade away. 5The earth also is polluted by its inhabitants, because they have transgressed laws, violated statutes, and broken the everlasting covenant. 6Therefore, a curse devours the earth, and those who live on it suffer the punishment of their guilt. Therefore, the inhabitants of the earth are burned [under the curse of God’s wrath], and few people are left. 7The new wine mourns,
The vine decays;
All the merry-hearted sigh and groan. 8The mirth of the timbrels (tambourines) ceases,
The noise of those who rejoice ends,
The joy of the harp ceases. 9They do not drink wine with a song;
Strong drink is bitter to those who drink it. 10The city of chaos is broken down;
Every house is shut up so that no one may enter. 11There is an outcry in the streets concerning the wine;
All jubilation is darkened,
The joy of the earth is banished. 12Horrible desolation is left in the city,
And the gate is battered into ruins. 13For so it will be in the midst of the earth among the peoples,
As the shaking of an olive tree,
As the gleanings when the grape harvest is over [and only a little of the fruit remains]. 14They [who have escaped and remain] raise their voices, they shout for joy;
They rejoice from the [Mediterranean] Sea in the majesty of the LORD. 15Therefore honor and glorify the LORD in the east [in the region of light],
The name of the LORD, the God of Israel [honor His name],
In the coastlands and islands of the [Mediterranean] Sea. 16From the ends of the earth we hear songs, “Glory and honor to the Righteous One,”
But I say, “I waste away, I waste away. Woe to me!
The treacherous deal treacherously,
Indeed, the treacherous deal very treacherously.” 17Terror and pit [of destruction] and snare
Confront you, O inhabitant of the earth. 18Then it will be that he who flees at the sound of terror will fall into the pit,
And he who comes up out of the pit will be caught in the snare;
For the windows of heaven are opened, and the foundations of the earth tremble. 19The earth is broken completely apart,
The earth is split apart,
The earth is shaken violently. 20The earth reels back and forth like a drunkard
And sways like a shack;
Its transgression lies heavily upon it,
And it will fall and not rise again. 21So it will happen in that day
That the LORD will visit and punish the host (fallen angels) of heaven on high,
And the kings of the earth on the earth. 22They will be gathered together
As prisoners [are gathered] in a dungeon;
They will be shut up in prison,
And after many days they will be visited and punished. 23Then the full moon will be embarrassed and the sun ashamed,
For the LORD of hosts will reign on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem,
And His glory and brilliance will shine before His elders.

Isaiah 25
Song Of Praise For God’s Favor
1O LORD, You are my God;
I will exalt You, I will praise and give thanks to Your name;
For You have done miraculous things,
Plans formed long, long ago, [fulfilled] with perfect faithfulness. 2For You have made a city into a heap [of trash],
A fortified city into a ruin;
A palace of foreigners is no longer a city,
It will never be rebuilt. 3Therefore a strong people will honor You;
Cities of terrible and violent nations will fear You. 4For You have been a stronghold for the helpless,
A stronghold for the poor in his distress,
A shelter from the storm, a shade from the heat;
For the breath of tyrants
Is like a rainstorm against a wall. 5Like heat in a dry land, You will subdue the noise of foreigners [rejoicing over their enemies];
Like heat in the shadow of a cloud, the song of the tyrants is silenced. 6On this mountain [Zion] the LORD of hosts will prepare a lavish banquet for all peoples [to welcome His reign on earth],
A banquet of aged wines—choice pieces [flavored] with marrow,
Of refined, aged wines. 7And on this mountain He will destroy the covering that is [cast] over all peoples,
And the veil [of death] that is woven and spread over all the nations. 8He will swallow up death [and abolish it] for all time.
And the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from all faces,
And He will take away the disgrace of His people from all the earth;
For the LORD has spoken. 9It will be said in that day,
“Indeed, this is our God for whom we have waited that He would save us.
This is the LORD for whom we have waited;
Let us shout for joy and rejoice in His salvation.” 10For the hand of the LORD will rest on this mountain [Zion],
And Moab will be trampled down in his place
As straw is trampled down in the [filthy] water of a manure pile. 11And Moab will spread out his hands in the middle of the filth
As a swimmer spreads out his hands to swim,
But the Lord will humiliate his pride in spite of the [skillful] movements of his hands. 12The high fortifications of your walls He will bring down,
Lay low, and cast to the ground, to the dust.

Isaiah 26
Song Of Trust In God’s Protection
1In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah: “We have a strong city;
He sets up salvation as walls and ramparts. 2“Open the gates, that the righteous nation may enter,
The one that remains faithful and trustworthy. 3“You will keep in perfect and constant peace the one whose mind is steadfast [that is, committed and focused on You—in both inclination and character],
Because he trusts and takes refuge in You [with hope and confident expectation]. 4“Trust [confidently] in the LORD forever [He is your fortress, your shield, your banner],
For the LORD GOD is an everlasting Rock [the Rock of Ages]. 5“For He has thrown down the [arrogant] ones who dwell on high, the lofty and inaccessible city;
He lays it low, He lays it low to the ground, He hurls it to the dust. 6“The foot will trample it,
Even the feet of the suffering, and the steps of the helpless.” 7The way of the righteous [those in right-standing with God—living in moral and spiritual integrity] is smooth and level;
O Upright One, make a level path for the just and righteous. 8Indeed, in the path of Your judgments, O LORD,
We have waited expectantly for You;
Your name, even Your memory, is the desire and deep longing of our souls. 9In the night my soul longs for You [O LORD],
Indeed, my spirit within me seeks You diligently;
For [only] when Your judgments are experienced on the earth
Will the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness. 10Though the wicked is shown compassion and favor,
He does not learn righteousness;
In the land of uprightness he deals unjustly,
And refuses to see the majesty of the LORD. 11Though Your hand is lifted up [to strike], O LORD, the wicked do not see it.
Let them see Your zeal for Your people and be put to shame;
Indeed, let the fire reserved for Your enemies consume them. 12LORD, You will establish peace for us,
Since You have also performed for us all that we have done. 13O LORD our God, other masters besides You have ruled over us;
But through You alone we confess Your name. 14The [wicked] dead will not live [again], the spirits of the dead will not rise and return;
Therefore You have punished and destroyed them,
And You have wiped out every memory of them [every trace of them]. 15You have increased the nation, O LORD;
You have increased the nation, You are glorified;
You have extended all the borders of the land. 16O LORD, they sought You in distress;
They managed only a prayerful whisper
When Your discipline was upon them. 17As a woman with child approaches the time to give birth,
She is in pain and struggles and cries out in her labor,
So we were before You, O LORD. 18We have been with child, we have twisted and struggled in labor;
We gave birth, as it seems, only to wind.
We could not accomplish salvation for the earth,
Nor were inhabitants of the world born. 19Your dead will live;
Their dead bodies will rise.
You who lie in the dust, awake and shout for joy!
For your dew is a dew of [celestial] light [heavenly, supernatural],
And the earth will give birth to the spirits of the dead. 20Come, my people, enter your chambers
And shut your doors behind you;
Hide for a little while
Until the [LORD’S] wrath is past. 21Listen carefully, the LORD is about to come out of His [heavenly] place
To punish the inhabitants of the earth for their wickedness [their sin, their injustice, their wrongdoing];
The earth will reveal the [innocent] blood shed upon her
And will no longer cover her slain.

Isaiah 27
The Deliverance Of Israel
1In that day the Lord will punish Leviathan the fleeing serpent
With His fierce and great and mighty sword [rescuing Israel from her enemy],
Even Leviathan the twisted serpent;
And He will kill the dragon who lives in the sea. 2In that day [it will be said of the redeemed nation of Israel],
“A vineyard of wine, sing in praise of it! 3“I, the LORD, am its Keeper;
I water it every moment.
So that no one will harm it,
I guard it night and day. 4“I have no wrath.
Should anyone give Me briars and thorns in battle,
I would step on them, I would set them all on fire. 5“Or let him (Israel) cling to My strength and rely on My protection [My stronghold],
Let him make peace with Me,
Let him make peace with Me.” 6In the generations to come Jacob will take root;
Israel will blossom and sprout,
And they will fill the surface of the world with fruit. 7Like the striking by Him who has struck them, has He struck them?
Or like the slaughter of His slain, have they been slain? 8You contended with them by exile, by driving them away [from Canaan];
He has expelled them with His fierce wind on the day of the east wind. 9Therefore through this the wickedness [the sin, the injustice, the wrongdoing] of Jacob (Israel) will be atoned for and forgiven;
And this will be the full price [that God requires] for taking away his sin:
When Israel makes all the stones of the [pagan] altars like crushed chalk stones;
When the Asherim and the incense altars will not stand. 10For the fortified city is isolated,
A settlement deserted and abandoned like the desert;
There the calf will graze,
And there it will lie down and feed on its branches. 11When its branches are dry, they are broken off;
The women come and make a fire with them.
For they are not a people of understanding,
Therefore He who made them will not have compassion on them,
And He who created them will not be gracious to them.
12In that day the LORD will thresh [out His grain] from the flowing stream of the River [Euphrates] to the Brook of Egypt, and you will be gathered up one by one, O sons of Israel. 13It will come to pass in that day that a great trumpet will be blown, and those who were lost and perishing in the land of Assyria and who were scattered in the land of Egypt will come and worship the LORD on the holy mountain at Jerusalem.

Isaiah 28
Ephraim’s Captivity Predicted
1Woe (judgment is coming) to [Samaria] the splendid crown of the drunkards of Ephraim,
And to the fading flower of its glorious beauty,
Which is at the head of the rich valley
Of those who are overcome with wine! 2Listen carefully, the Lord has a strong and mighty agent [the Assyrian];
Like a tempest of hail, a disastrous storm,
Like a tempest of mighty overflowing waters,
He has cast it down to the earth with His hand. 3The splendid crown of the drunkards of Ephraim is trampled by [the foreigners’] feet. 4And the fading flower of its glorious beauty,
Which is at the head of the rich valley,
Will be like the early fig before the summer,
Which one sees,
And as soon as it is in his hand
He [greedily] swallows it [and so will the Assyrians rapidly devour Samaria, Israel’s capital]. 5In that day the LORD of hosts will become a magnificent crown
And a glorious diadem to the [converted] remnant of His people, 6A spirit of justice for him who sits in judgment [administering the law],
A strength to those who drive back the battle at the gate. 7But even these reel with wine and stagger from strong drink:
The priest and the prophet reel with strong drink;
They are confused by wine, they stagger from strong drink;
They reel while seeing visions,
They stagger when pronouncing judgment. 8For all the tables are full of filthy vomit, so that there is no place [that is clean.] 9They say “To whom would He teach knowledge?
And to whom would He explain the message?
Those just weaned from milk?
Those just taken from the breast? 10“For He says,
‘Precept upon precept, precept upon precept,
Rule upon rule, rule upon rule,
Here a little, there a little.’” 11Indeed, the LORD will teach this people [in a more humiliating way]
By [men with] stammering lips and a foreign tongue, 12He who said to them, “This is the place of quiet, give rest to the weary,”
And, “This is the resting place,” yet they would not listen. 13Therefore the word of the LORD to them will be [merely monotonous repetitions]:
“Precept upon precept, precept upon precept,
Rule upon rule, rule upon rule,
Here a little, there a little.”
That they may go and stumble backward, and be broken, ensnared, and taken captive. Judah Is Warned 14Therefore, hear the word of the LORD, you arrogant men
Who rule this people who are in Jerusalem! 15Because you have said, “We have made a covenant with death,
And with Sheol (the place of the dead) we have made an agreement,
When the overwhelming scourge passes by, it will not reach us,
For we have made lies our refuge and we have concealed ourselves in deception.”
16Therefore the Lord GOD says this, “Listen carefully, I am laying in Zion a Stone, a tested Stone,
A precious Cornerstone for the [secure] foundation, firmly placed.
He who believes [who trusts in, relies on, and adheres to that Stone] will not be disturbed or give way [in sudden panic]. 17“I will make justice the measuring line
And righteousness the mason’s level;
Then hail will sweep away the refuge of lies
And waters will flood over the secret [hiding] place. 18“Your covenant with death will be annulled,
And your agreement with Sheol (the place of the dead) will not stand;
When the overwhelming scourge passes through,
Then you will become its trampling ground. 19“As often as it passes through, it will seize you;
For morning after morning it will pass through, by day and by night,
And it will be sheer terror to understand what it means.” 20For the bed is too short to stretch out on,
And the blanket is too narrow to wrap around oneself [and likewise all their preparations are inadequate]. 21For the LORD will rise up as at Mount Perazim,
He will be stirred up as in the Valley of Gibeon,
To do His work, His unusual and incredible work,
And to accomplish His work, His extraordinary work. 22Now do not carry on as scoffers,
Or the bands which bind you will be made stronger;
For I have heard from the Lord GOD of hosts [a decree]
Of decisive destruction on all the earth. 23Listen and hear my voice;
Listen carefully and hear my words. 24Does the farmer plow all day to plant seed?
Does he continually dig furrows and harrow his ground [after it is prepared]? 25When he has leveled its surface,
Does he not sow [the seed of] dill and scatter cumin,
And plant wheat in rows,
And barley in its [intended] place and rye within its border? 26For his God instructs [him correctly] and teaches him properly. 27For dill is not threshed with a sharp threshing sledge,
Nor is a cartwheel rolled over cumin;
But dill is beaten out with a staff, and cumin with a rod. 28Bread grain is crushed fine,
Indeed, the farmer does not continue to thresh it forever.
Because the wheel of his cart and his horses eventually damage it,
He does not thresh it longer. 29This also comes from the LORD of hosts,
Who has made His counsel wonderful and His wisdom great.

Isaiah 29
Jerusalem Is Warned
1Woe (judgment is coming) to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David [once] camped!
Add yet another year; let the feasts run their course [but only one year more]. 2Then I will harass Ariel,
And she will be a city of mourning and lamenting (crying out in grief)
Yet she will be like an Ariel [an altar hearth] to Me. 3I will camp against you and encircle you,
And I will hem you in with siege works,
And I will raise fortifications against you. 4Then you [Jerusalem] will be brought low,
You will speak from the earth,
And from the dust where you lie face down
Your muffled words will come.
Your voice will also be like that of a spirit from the earth [like one produced by a medium],
And your speech will whisper and squeak from the dust. 5But the multitude of your enemies [that assault you] will become like fine dust,
And the multitude of the tyrants like the chaff which blows away;
And it will happen in an instant, suddenly [that your enemy is destroyed]. 6You will be punished by the LORD of hosts with thunder and earthquake and great noise,
With whirlwind and tempest and the flame of a consuming fire. 7And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel (Jerusalem),
Even all who fight against her and her stronghold, and who distress her,
Will be like a dream, a vision of the night. 8It will be as when a hungry man dreams
That he is eating,
But when he awakens, his hunger is not satisfied;
Or as when a thirsty man dreams
That he is drinking,
But when he awakens, in fact, he is faint
And his thirst is not quenched.
So will the multitude of all the nations be
Who fight against Mount Zion. 9Stop and take some time and wonder [at this prophecy],
Blind yourselves and be blinded [at its fulfillment by your spiritual incompetence].
They are drunk, but not from wine;
They stagger, but not from strong drink. 10For the LORD has poured over you a spirit of deep sleep.
He has closed your eyes, [you who are] the prophets;
And He has covered your heads, [you who are] the seers.
11The entire vision [of all these things] will be to you like the words of a scroll that is sealed, which they give to one who can read, saying, “Read this, please,” he shall say, “I cannot, for it is sealed.” 12Then the book will be given to the one who cannot read, saying, “Read this, please.” And he will say, “I cannot read.”
13Then the Lord said, “Because this nation approaches [Me only] with their words
And honors Me [only] with their lip service,
But they remove their hearts far from Me,
And their reverence for Me is a tradition that is learned by rote [without any regard for its meaning], 14Therefore, listen carefully, I will again do marvelous and amazing things with this people, wonderful and astonishing things;
And the wisdom of their wise men will perish,
And the understanding of their discerning men will be hidden.” 15Woe (judgment is coming) to those who [try to] deeply hide their plans from the LORD,
Whose deeds are done in a dark place,
And who say, “Who sees us?” or “Who knows us?” 16You turn things upside down [with your perversity]!
Shall the potter be considered equal with the clay,
That the thing that is made would say to its maker, “He did not make me”;
Or the thing that is formed say to him who formed it, “He has no understanding”? Blessing after Discipline 17Is it not yet a very little while
Until Lebanon will be turned into a fertile field,
And the fertile field regarded as a forest? 18On that day the deaf will hear the words of a book,
And out of their gloom and darkness the eyes of the blind will see [the words of the book]. 19The afflicted also will increase their joy in the LORD,
And the needy of mankind will rejoice and celebrate in the Holy One of Israel. 20For the tyrant will come to an end and the scorner will be finished,
Indeed all who are intent on doing evil will be cut off— 21Those who cause a person to be condemned with a [false] word,
And lay a trap for him who upholds justice at the [city] gate,
And defraud the one in the right with meaningless arguments.
22Therefore, the LORD, who redeemed Abraham [from paganism] says this, concerning the house of Jacob (Israel): “Jacob will not be ashamed, nor will his face turn pale [with disappointment because of his children’s degenerate behavior]; 23For when he sees his children, the work of My hands, in his midst,
They will sanctify My Name;
They will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob
And will stand in awe and reverent fear of the God of Israel. 24“Those who err in mind will know the truth,
And those who criticize and murmur discontentedly will accept instruction.

Isaiah 30
Judah Warned Against Egyptian Alliance
1“Woe (judgment is coming) to the rebellious children,” declares the LORD,
“Who carry out a plan, but not Mine,
And make an alliance [by pouring out a libation], but not of My Spirit,
In order to add sin to sin; 2Who proceed down to Egypt
Without consulting Me,
To take refuge in the stronghold of Pharaoh
And to take shelter in the shadow of Egypt! 3“Therefore the safety and protection of Pharaoh will be your shame
And the refuge in the shadow of Egypt, your humiliation and disgrace. 4“For his princes are at Zoan
And his ambassadors arrive at Hanes [in Egypt]. 5“All will be ashamed because of a people (the Egyptians) who cannot benefit them,
Who are not a help or benefit, but a shame and also a disgrace.”
6A [mournful, inspired] oracle (a burden to be carried) concerning the beasts of the Negev (the South): Through a land of trouble and anguish,
From where come lioness and lion, viper and [fiery] flying serpent,
They carry their riches on the shoulders of young donkeys
And their treasures on the humps of camels,
To a people (Egyptians) who cannot benefit them. 7For Egypt’s help is worthless and good for nothing.
Therefore, I have called her
“Rahab Who Has Been Exterminated.” 8Now, go, write it on a tablet before them
And inscribe it on a scroll,
So that it may serve in the time to come
As a witness [against them] forevermore. 9For this is a rebellious people, lying sons,
Sons who refuse to listen to
The law and instruction of the LORD; 10Who say to the seers, “You must not see visions from God”;
And to the prophets, “You must not prophesy to us what is right!
Speak to us pleasant things and smooth words,
Prophesy [deceitful] illusions [that we will enjoy]. 11“Get out of the [true] way, turn aside from the path [of God],
Stop bothering us with the Holy One of Israel.”
12Therefore, the Holy One of Israel says this, “Because you have refused and rejected this word [of Mine]
And have put your trust in oppression and guile, and have relied on them, 13Therefore this wickedness [this sin, this injustice, this wrongdoing] will be to you
Like a crack [in a wall] about to fall,
A bulge in a high wall,
Whose collapse comes suddenly in an instant, 14“Whose collapse is like the smashing of a potter’s jar,
Crushed so savagely
that there cannot be found among its pieces a potsherd [large enough]
To take [coals of] fire from a fireplace,
Or to scoop water from a cistern.”
15For the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel has said this, “In returning [to Me] and rest you shall be saved,
In quietness and confident trust is your strength.”
But you were not willing, 16And you said, “No! We will flee on horses!”
Therefore you will flee [from your enemies]!
And [you said], “We will ride on swift horses!”
Therefore those who pursue you shall be swift. 17A thousand of you will flee at the threat of one man;
You will flee at the threat of five,
Until you are left like a flag on the top of a mountain,
And like a signal on a hill. God Is Gracious and Just 18Therefore the LORD waits [expectantly] and longs to be gracious to you,
And therefore He waits on high to have compassion on you.
For the LORD is a God of justice;
Blessed (happy, fortunate) are all those who long for Him [since He will never fail them].
19O people in Zion, inhabitant in Jerusalem, you will weep no longer. He will most certainly be gracious to you at the sound of your cry for help; when He hears it, He will answer you. 20Though the Lord gives you the bread of adversity and the water of oppression, yet your Teacher will no longer hide Himself, but your eyes will [constantly] see your Teacher. 21Your ears will hear a word behind you, “This is the way, walk in it,” whenever you turn to the right or to the left. 22And you will defile your carved images overlaid with silver, and your cast images plated with gold. You will scatter them like a bloodstained cloth, and will say to them, “Be gone!”
23Then He will give you rain for the seed with which you sow the ground, and bread [grain] from the produce of the ground, and it will be rich and plentiful. In that day your livestock will graze in large and roomy pastures. 24Also the oxen and the young donkeys that work the ground will eat salted fodder, which has been winnowed with shovel and pitchfork. 25On every lofty mountain and on every high hill there will be streams of water on the day of the great slaughter (the day of the LORD), when the towers fall [and all His enemies are destroyed]. 26The light of the full moon will be like the light of the sun, and the light of the sun will be seven times brighter, like the light of seven days [concentrated in one], in the day the LORD binds up the fracture of His people and heals the wound He has inflicted [because of their sins]. 27Now look, the name of the LORD comes from far away,
Burning with His anger, and heavy with smoke;
His lips are full of indignation,
And His tongue is like a consuming fire. 28His breath is like an overflowing river,
Which reaches to the neck,
To sift the nations back and forth in a sieve [of disaster],
And to put in the jaws of the peoples the bridle which leads to ruin. 29You will have a song as in the night when a holy feast is kept,
And joy of heart as when one marches [in procession] with a flute,
To go to the [temple on the] mountain of the LORD, to the Rock of Israel. 30And the LORD will make His majestic voice heard,
And show the descending of His arm [striking] in [His] fierce anger,
And in the flame of a devouring fire,
In the crashing sound of heavy rain, cloudburst, and hailstones. 31For at the voice of the LORD the Assyrians will be terrified,
When He strikes [them] with the rod. 32And every blow of the rod of punishment,
Which the LORD will lay on them,
Will be to the music of Israel’s tambourines and lyres;
And in battles, brandishing weapons, He will fight Assyria. 33For Topheth [in Hinnom] has long been ready;
Indeed, it has been prepared for the [Assyrian] king.
He has made it deep and wide,
A pit of fire with plenty of wood;
The breath of the LORD, like a river of brimstone (blazing sulfur), kindles and fans it.

Isaiah 31
Look Not To Egypt But To God
1Woe (judgment is coming) to those who go down to Egypt for help,
Who rely on horses
And trust in chariots because they are many,
And in horsemen because they are very strong,
But they do not look to the Holy One of Israel, nor seek and consult the LORD! 2Yet He is also wise and will bring disaster,
And does not retract His words,
But will arise against the house of evildoers
And against the helpers of those who do evil. 3Now the Egyptians are men and not God,
And their horses are flesh and not spirit;
And the LORD will stretch out His hand,
And he (Egypt) who helps will stumble,
And he (Judah) who is helped will fall,
And all of them will perish together.
4For so the LORD says to me, “As the lion or the young lion growls over his prey,
And though a large group of shepherds is called out against him
He will not be terrified at their voice nor cringe at their noise,
So the LORD of hosts will come down to wage war on Mount Zion and on its hill.” 5Like flying birds, so will the LORD of hosts protect Jerusalem;
He will protect and save it,
He will pass over and rescue it.
6Return to Him from whom you have so deeply defected, O sons of Israel. 7For in that day every man will reject and throw away his idols of silver and his idols of gold [in disgust], which your own hands have sinfully made for you. 8Then the Assyrian will fall by a sword not of man,
And a sword not of man will devour him.
And he will flee from the sword [of God],
And his young men will become forced labor. 9“His rock [his stronghold] will pass away because of panic,
And his princes will be terrified at the [sight of the battle] standard,”
Declares the LORD, whose fire is in Zion and whose furnace is in Jerusalem.

Isaiah 32
The Glorious Future
1Behold, a King will reign in righteousness,
And princes will rule with justice. 2Each [one of them] will be like a hiding place from the wind
And a shelter from the storm,
Like streams of water in a dry land,
Like the shade of a huge rock in a parched and weary land [to those who turn to them]. 3Then the eyes of those who see will not be blinded,
And the ears of those who hear will listen attentively. 4The heart (mind) of those who act impulsively will discern the truth,
And the tongue of the stammerers will hurry to speak clearly. 5The fool (the good-for-nothing) will no longer be called noble,
Nor the rogue said to be generous. 6For the fool speaks nonsense,
And his heart (mind) plans wickedness:
To practice ungodliness and to speak error concerning the LORD,
To keep the craving of the hungry unsatisfied
And to deprive the thirsty of drink. 7As for the rogue, his weapons are evil;
He conceives wicked plans
To ruin the poor with lies,
Even when the plea of the needy one is just and right. 8But the noble man conceives noble and magnificent things;
And he stands by what is noble and magnificent. 9Rise up, you women who are carefree,
And hear my voice,
You confident and unsuspecting daughters!
Listen to what I am saying. 10In little more than a year
You will tremble [with anxiety], you unsuspecting and complacent women;
For the vintage has ended,
And the harvest will not come. 11Tremble, you women who are carefree;
Tremble with fear, you complacent ones!
Strip, undress and wear sackcloth on your waist [in grief], 12Beat your breasts [in mourning] for the beautiful fields, for the fruitful vine, 13For the land of my people growing over with thorns and briars—
Yes, [mourn] for all the houses of joy in the joyous city. 14For the palace has been abandoned, the populated city deserted;
The hill [of the city] and the watchtower have become caves [for wild animals] forever,
A delight for wild donkeys, a pasture for flocks, 15Until the Spirit is poured out upon us from on high,
And the wilderness becomes a fertile field,
And the fertile field is valued as a forest. 16Then justice will dwell in the wilderness,
And righteousness will live in the fertile field. 17And the effect of righteousness will be peace,
And the result of righteousness will be quietness and confident trust forever. 18Then my people will live in a peaceful surrounding,
And in secure dwellings and in undisturbed resting places. 19But it will hail, when the forest comes down,
And the [capital] city will fall in utter humiliation. 20Blessed (happy, fortunate) are you who cast your seed upon all waters [when the river overflows its banks and irrigates the land],
You who allow the ox and the donkey to roam freely.

Isaiah 33
The Judgment Of God
1Woe (judgment is coming) to you, O destroyer,
You who were not destroyed,
And he who is treacherous, while others did not deal treacherously with him.
As soon as you finish destroying, you will be destroyed;
As soon as you stop dealing treacherously, others will deal treacherously with you. 2O LORD, be gracious to us; we have waited [expectantly] for You.
Be the arm of Your servants every morning [that is, their strength and their defense],
Our salvation also in the time of trouble. 3At the sound of the tumult, the peoples flee;
At the lifting up of Yourself nations scatter. 4Your spoil [of Israel’s foe] is gathered [by the people of Jerusalem] as the caterpillar gathers;
As locusts swarming so people swarm on it. 5The LORD is exalted, for He dwells on high;
He has filled Zion with justice and righteousness. 6And He will be the security and stability of your times,
A treasure of salvation, wisdom and knowledge;
The fear of the LORD is your treasure. 7Now look, their brave men shout outside;
The ambassadors [seeking a treaty] of peace weep bitterly. 8The highways are deserted, the traveler has ceased [to appear].
The enemy has broken the covenant, he has rejected the cities,
He has no regard for [any] man. 9The land mourns and dries out,
Lebanon is shamed and [its lush foliage] withers;
Sharon is like a desert plain,
And Bashan and [Mount] Carmel shake off their leaves. 10“Now I will arise,” says the LORD. “Now I will be exalted; now I will be lifted up. 11“You have conceived dried grass, you will give birth to stubble;
My breath is a fire that will consume you. 12“The peoples will be burned to lime,
Like thorns cut down which are burned in the fire. 13“You who are far away, hear what I have done;
And you who are near, acknowledge My might.” 14The sinners in Zion are terrified;
Trembling has seized the godless.
[They cry] “Who among us can live with the consuming fire?
Who among us can live with everlasting burning?” 15He who walks righteously and speaks with integrity,
Who rejects gain from fraud and from oppression,
Who shakes his hand free from the taking of bribes,
Who stops his ears from hearing about bloodshed
And shuts his eyes to avoid looking upon evil; 16He will dwell on the heights,
His place of defense will be the fortress of rocks,
His bread will be given him;
His water will be permanent. 17Your eyes will see the King in His beauty;
They will see a far-distant land. 18Your mind will meditate on the terror [asking]:
“Where is he who counts?
Where is he who weighs [the tribute]?
Where is he who counts the towers?” 19You will no longer see the fierce and insolent people,
A people of unintelligible speech which no one comprehends,
Of a strange and stammering tongue which no one understands. 20Look upon Zion, the city of our appointed feasts and observances;
Your eyes will see Jerusalem, a undisturbed settlement,
A tent which will not be taken down;
Not one of its stakes will ever be pulled up,
Nor any of its ropes be severed. 21But there the mighty and magnificent LORD will be for us
A place of broad rivers and streams,
Where no oar-driven boat will go,
And on which no mighty and stately ship will pass. 22For the LORD is our Judge,
The LORD is our Ruler,
The LORD is our King;
He will save us. 23Your ship’s ropes (tackle) hang loose;
They cannot hold the base of their mast firmly,
Nor spread out the sail.
Then an abundance of spoil and plunder will be divided;
Even the lame will take the plunder. 24And no inhabitant [of Zion] will say, “I am sick”;
The people who dwell there will be forgiven their wickedness [their sin, their injustice, their wrongdoing].

Isaiah 34
God’s Wrath Against Nations
1Come near, you nations, to hear; and listen, O peoples!
Let the earth and all that is in it hear, and the world and all that comes forth from it. 2For the LORD is angry at all the nations,
And His wrath is against all their armies;
He has utterly doomed them,
He has given them over to slaughter. 3So their slain will be thrown out,
And the stench of their corpses will rise,
And the mountains will flow with their blood. 4All the host of heaven will be dissolved,
And the skies will be rolled up like a scroll;
All their hosts [the stars and the planets] will also wither away
As a leaf withers from the vine,
And as a fig withers from the fig tree. 5For My sword is satiated [with blood] in heaven;
Indeed, it will come down for judgment on Edom
And on the people whom I have doomed for destruction. 6The sword of the LORD is filled with blood [from sacrifices],
It drips with fat, with the blood of lambs and goats,
With the fat of the kidneys of rams.
For the LORD has a sacrifice in Bozrah (Edom’s capital city)
And a great slaughter in the land of Edom. 7Wild oxen will also fall with them
And the young bulls with the strong bulls;
And their land will be soaked with blood,
And their dust made greasy with fat. 8For the LORD has a day of vengeance,
A year of retribution for the cause of Zion. 9The streams [of Edom] will be turned into pitch,
And its dust into brimstone,
And its land will become burning pitch. 10The burning will not be quenched night or day;
Its smoke will go up forever.
From generation to generation it will lie in ruins;
No one will ever again pass through it. 11But the pelican and the porcupine will take possession of it;
The owl and the raven will dwell in it.
And He will stretch over it (Edom) the measuring line of desolation
And the plumb line of emptiness. 12Its nobles—there is no one there
Whom they may proclaim king—
And all its princes will be nothing. 13Thorns will come up in its fortified palaces,
Nettles and brambles in its fortified cities;
It will be a haunt for jackals,
An abode for ostriches. 14The creatures of the desert will encounter jackals
And the hairy goat will call to its kind;
Indeed, Lilith (night demon) will settle there
And find herself a place of rest. 15There the arrow snake will make her nest and lay her eggs,
And hatch them and gather her young under her protection;
Indeed, the birds of prey will be gathered there [to breed],
Every one with its own kind.
16Seek from the book of the LORD, and read: Not one of these [creatures] will be missing;
None will lack its mate.
For His mouth has commanded,
And His Spirit has gathered them. 17The LORD has cast the lot for them,
And His hand has divided and apportioned Edom to the wild beasts by measuring-line.
They will possess it forever;
From generation to generation they will dwell in it.

Isaiah 35
Zion’s Joyful Future
1The wilderness and the dry land will be glad;
The Arabah (desert) will shout in exultation and blossom
Like the autumn crocus. 2It will blossom abundantly
And rejoice with joy and singing.
The glory of Lebanon will be given to it,
The majesty of [Mount] Carmel and [the plain] of Sharon.
They will see the glory of the LORD,
The majesty and splendor of our God. 3Encourage the exhausted, and make staggering knees firm. 4Say to those with an anxious and panic-stricken heart,
“Be strong, fear not!
Indeed, your God will come with vengeance [for the ungodly];
The retribution of God will come,
But He will save you.” 5Then the eyes of the blind will be opened
And the ears of the deaf will be unstopped. 6Then the lame will leap like a deer,
And the tongue of the mute will shout for joy.
For waters will break forth in the wilderness
And streams in the desert. 7And the burning sand (mirage) will become a pool [of water]
And the thirsty ground springs of water;
In the haunt of jackals, where they lay resting,
Grass becomes reeds and rushes. 8A highway will be there, and a roadway;
And it will be called the Holy Way.
The unclean will not travel on it,
But it will be for those who walk on the way [the redeemed];
And fools will not wander on it. 9No lion will be there,
Nor will any predatory animal come up on it;
They will not be found there.
But the redeemed will walk there. 10And the ransomed of the LORD will return
And come to Zion with shouts of jubilation,
And everlasting joy will be upon their heads;
They will find joy and gladness,
And sorrow and sighing will flee away.

Isaiah 36
Sennacherib Invades Judah
1Now in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and conquered them. 2And the king of Assyria sent the Rabshakeh [his military commander] from Lachish [the Judean fortress commanding the road from Egypt] to King Hezekiah at Jerusalem with a large army. And he stood by the canal of the Upper Pool on the highway to the Fuller’s Field. 3Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was in charge of the [royal] household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph, the recording historian, came out to [meet] him.
4Then the Rabshakeh said to them, “Say to Hezekiah, ‘This is what the great king, the king of Assyria says, “What is [the reason for] this confidence that you have? 5I say, ‘Your plan and strength for the war are only empty words.’ Now in whom do you trust and on whom do you rely, that you have rebelled against me? 6Listen carefully, you rely on the staff of this broken reed, Egypt, which will pierce the hand of any man who leans on it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who rely on him. 7But if you say to me, ‘We trust in and rely on the LORD our God,’ is it not He whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, saying to Judah and to Jerusalem, ‘You shall worship before this altar’? 8So now, exchange pledges with my master the king of Assyria and I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able on your part to put riders on them. 9How then can you repulse [the attack of] a single commander of the least of my master’s servants, and rely on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 10“Moreover, is it without the LORD that I have now come up against this land to destroy it? The LORD said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”’”
11Then Eliakim and Shebna and Joah said to the Rabshakeh, “Please, speak to your servants in Aramaic, because we understand it; and do not speak to us in Judean (Hebrew) in the hearing of the people who are [stationed] on the wall.” 12But the Rabshakeh said, “Has my master sent me to speak these words only to your master and to you, and not to the men sitting on the wall, doomed to eat their own dung and drink their own urine with you?”
13Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out with a loud voice in Judean (Hebrew): “Hear the words of the great king, the king of Assyria. 14This is what the king says, ‘Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to rescue you; 15nor let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, “The LORD will most certainly rescue us; this city will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.” 16‘Do not listen to Hezekiah,’ for this is what the king of Assyria says, ‘Make peace with me and come out to me, and each one of you will eat from his own vine and each from his own fig tree and each [one of you] drink from the water of his own cistern, 17until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 18‘Beware that Hezekiah does not mislead you by saying, “The LORD will rescue us.” Has any one of the gods of the nations [ever] rescued his land from the hand of the king of Assyria? 19‘Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad [in Aram]? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? And when have they rescued Samaria from my hand? 20‘Who among all the gods of these lands have rescued their land from my hand, that [you should think that] the LORD would rescue Jerusalem from my hand?’”
21But they kept silent and did not say a word to him in reply, for King Hezekiah’s command was, “Do not answer him.” 22Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was in charge of the household, and Shebna the scribe and Joah the son of Asaph, the recording historian, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn [in grief], and told him the words of the Rabshakeh [the Assyrian commander].

Isaiah 37
Hezekiah Seeks Isaiah’s Help
1And when King Hezekiah heard this, he tore his clothes and covered himself with sackcloth and went into the house of the LORD. 2Then he sent Eliakim, who was in charge of the [royal] household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz. 3They said to him, “This is what Hezekiah says, ‘This day is a day of distress, rebuke and disgrace; for children have come to birth, and there is no strength to deliver them. 4‘It may be that the LORD your God will hear the words of the Rabshakeh [the commander], whom his master the king of Assyria has sent to taunt and defy the living God, and will avenge the words which the LORD your God has heard. Therefore, offer a prayer for the remnant [of His people] that is left.’”
5So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah. 6Isaiah said to them, “You shall say the following to your master: ‘This is what the LORD says, “Do not be afraid because of the words that you have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed Me. 7“Listen carefully, I will put a spirit in him so that he will hear a rumor and return to his own land. And I will make him fall by the sword in his own land.”’”
8So the Rabshakeh returned and found the king of Assyria fighting against Libnah [a fortified city of Judah], for he had heard that the king had left Lachish. 9And Sennacherib king of Assyria, heard them say concerning Tirhakah king of Cush (Ethiopia), “He has come out to fight against you.” And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying, 10“You shall say to Hezekiah king of Judah, ‘Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you, saying, “Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.” 11‘Listen carefully, you have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, utterly destroying them. So will you be rescued? 12‘Did the gods of the nations which my fathers destroyed rescue them—Gozan, Haran [of Mesopotamia], Rezeph, and the sons of Eden who were in Telassar? 13‘Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad [of northern Syria], the king of the city of Sepharvaim, [the king of] Hena, or [the king of] Ivvah?’”
Hezekiah’s Prayer in the Temple 14Then Hezekiah took the letter from the hand of the messengers and read it, and he went up to the house of the LORD and spread it out before the LORD. 15And Hezekiah prayed to the LORD saying, 16“O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, who is enthroned above the cherubim, You are the God, You alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. You have made heaven and earth. 17Incline Your ear, O LORD, and hear; open Your eyes, O LORD, and see; and hear all the words of Sennacherib that he has sent to taunt and defy the living God. 18It is true, O LORD, that the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the countries and their lands, 19and have cast the gods [of those peoples] into the fire, for they were not gods but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone. Therefore they have destroyed them. 20“Now, O LORD our God, save us from his hand so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know and fully realize that You alone, LORD, are God.”
God Answers through Isaiah 21Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent word to Hezekiah, saying, “For the LORD, the God of Israel says this, ‘Because you have prayed to Me about Sennacherib king of Assyria, 22this is the word that the LORD has spoken against him: “She has shown contempt for you and mocked you,
The Virgin Daughter of Zion (Jerusalem);
She has shaken her head behind you,
The Daughter of Jerusalem! 23“Whom have you taunted and blasphemed?
And against whom have you raised your voice
And haughtily lifted up your eyes?
Against the Holy One of Israel! 24“Through your servants you have taunted and defied the Lord,
And you have said, ‘With my many chariots I have gone up to the heights of the mountains,
To the remotest parts of Lebanon.
I cut down its tallest cedars and its choicest cypress trees;
And I will go to its remotest height, its most luxuriant and thickest forest. 25‘I dug wells and drank [foreign] waters,
And with the sole of my feet I dried up
All the canals [of the Nile] of Egypt.’ 26“Have you not heard [says the God of Israel]
That I did it long ago,
That I planned it in ancient times?
Now I have brought it to pass,
That you [king of Assyria] would [be My instrument to] turn fortified cities into ruinous heaps. 27“Therefore their inhabitants had little power,
They were terrorized and shamed;
They were like the grass of the field and the green vegetation,
Like grass on the housetops and like a field [of grain] scorched before it is grown. 28“But I know your sitting down
And your going out and your coming in [every detail of your life],
And your raging against Me. 29“Because your raging against Me
And your arrogance has come up to My ears,
I will put My hook in your nose
And My bridle in your mouth,
And I will turn you back by the way you came.
30“This shall be the sign [of these things] to you [Hezekiah]: you are to eat this year what grows of itself, and in the second year that which springs from the same, and in the third year you are to sow and harvest, and plant vineyards and eat their fruit. 31The surviving remnant of the house of Judah will again take root downward and bear fruit upward. 32“For out of Jerusalem will come a remnant and from Mount Zion a band of survivors. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will do this.”’
33“Therefore, the LORD says this concerning the king of Assyria, ‘He will not come into this city or shoot an arrow there, or come before it with shield, or raise an assault ramp against it. 34‘By the way that he came, by the same way he will return, and he will not come into this city,’ declares the LORD. 35‘For I will defend this city to save it, for My own sake and for the sake of My servant David.’”
Assyrians Destroyed 36And the angel of the LORD went out and struck 185,000 in the camp of the Assyrians; and when the [surviving] men got up early the next morning, they saw all the dead. 37So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed and returned and lived at Nineveh. 38It came to pass as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons killed him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat [in Armenia]. And Esarhaddon his son became king in his place.

Isaiah 38
Hezekiah Healed
1In those days Hezekiah [king of Judah] became sick and was at the point of death. And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him and said, “For the LORD says this, ‘Set your house in order and prepare a will, for you shall die; you will not live.’” 2Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the LORD, 3and said, “Please, O LORD, just remember how I have walked before You in faithfulness and truth, and with a whole heart [absolutely devoted to You], and have done what is good in Your sight.” And Hezekiah wept greatly.
4Then the word of the LORD came to Isaiah, saying, 5“Go and say to Hezekiah, ‘For the LORD, the God of David your father says this, “I have heard your prayer, I have seen your tears; listen carefully, I will add fifteen years to your life. 6“I will rescue you and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city [Jerusalem].”’
7“This shall be the sign to you from the LORD, that the LORD will do this thing that He has spoken: 8“Listen carefully, I will turn the shadow on the stairway [denoting the time of day] ten steps backward, the shadow on the stairway (sundial) of Ahaz.” And the sunlight went ten steps backward on the stairway where it had [previously] gone down.
9This is the writing of Hezekiah king of Judah after he had been sick and had recovered from his illness: 10I said, “In mid-life
I am to go through the gates of Sheol (the place of the dead),
I am to be summoned, deprived of the remainder of my years.” 11I said, “I will not see the LORD
The LORD in the land of the living;
I will no longer see man among the inhabitants of the world. 12“My dwelling (body) is pulled up and removed from me like a shepherd’s tent;
I have rolled up my life as a weaver [rolls up the finished web].
He cuts me free from the warp [of the loom];
From day to night You bring me to an end. 13“I lay down until morning.
Like a lion, so He breaks all my bones;
From day until night You bring me to an end. 14“Like a swallow, like a crane, so I chirp;
I coo like a dove.
My eyes look wistfully upward;
O Lord, I am oppressed, take my side and be my security. 15“What shall I say?
For He has spoken to me, and He Himself has done it;
I will wander aimlessly all my years because of the bitterness of my soul. 16“O Lord, by these things men live,
And in all these is the life of my spirit;
Restore me to health and let me live! 17“Indeed, it was for my own well-being that I had such bitterness;
But You have loved back my life from the pit of nothingness (destruction),
For You have cast all my sins behind Your back. 18“For Sheol cannot praise or thank You,
Death cannot praise You and rejoice in You;
Those who go down to the pit cannot hope for Your faithfulness. 19“It is the living who give praise and thanks to You, as I do today;
A father tells his sons about Your faithfulness. 20“The LORD is ready to save me;
Therefore we will play my songs on stringed instruments
All the days of our lives at the house of the LORD.”
21Now Isaiah had said, “Have them take a cake of figs and rub it [as an ointment] on the inflamed spot, that he may recover.” 22Hezekiah also had said, “What is the sign that I will go up to the house of the LORD?”

Isaiah 39
Hezekiah Shows His Treasures
1At that time Merodach-baladan son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent [messengers with] letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he had heard that he had been sick and had recovered. 2Hezekiah was pleased and showed them his treasure house—the silver, the gold, the spices, the precious oil, his entire armory and everything that was found in his treasuries. There was nothing in his house nor in all his area of dominion that Hezekiah did not show them. 3Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah and asked, “What did these men say? From where have they come to you?” And Hezekiah said, “They came to me from a far country, from Babylon.” 4Then Isaiah said, “What have they seen in your house?” And Hezekiah answered, “They have seen everything that is in my house; there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.”
5Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the LORD of hosts, 6‘Listen carefully, the days are coming when everything that is in your house and everything that your predecessors have stored up until this day will be carried to Babylon; nothing will be left,’ says the LORD. 7‘And some of your own sons (descendants) who will come from you, whom you will father, will be taken away, and they will become officials in the palace of the king of Babylon.’” 8Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, “The word of the LORD which you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “There will be peace and faithfulness [to God’s promises to us] in my days.”

Isaiah 40
The Greatness Of God
1“Comfort, O comfort My people,” says your God. 2“Speak tenderly to Jerusalem,
And call out to her, that her time of compulsory service in warfare is finished,
That her wickedness has been taken away [since her punishment is sufficient],
That she has received from the LORD’S hand
Double [punishment] for all her sins.” 3A voice of one is calling out,
“Clear the way for the LORD in the wilderness [remove the obstacles];
Make straight and smooth in the desert a highway for our God. 4“Every valley shall be raised,
And every mountain and hill be made low;
And let the rough ground become a plain,
And the rugged places a broad valley. 5“And the glory and majesty and splendor of the LORD will be revealed,
And all humanity shall see it together;
For the mouth of the LORD has spoken it.” 6A voice says, “Call out [prophesy].”
Then he answered, “What shall I call out?”
[The voice answered:] All humanity is [as frail as] grass, and all that makes it attractive [its charm, its loveliness] is [momentary] like the flower of the field. 7The grass withers, the flower fades,
When the breath of the LORD blows upon it;
Most certainly [all] the people are [like] grass. 8The grass withers, the flower fades,
But the word of our God stands forever. 9O Zion, herald of good news,
Get up on a high mountain.
O Jerusalem, herald of good news,
Lift up your voice with strength,
Lift it up, do not fear;
Say to the cities of Judah,
“Here is your God!” 10Listen carefully, the Lord GOD will come with might,
And His arm will rule for Him.
Most certainly His reward is with Him,
And His restitution accompanies Him. 11He will protect His flock like a shepherd,
He will gather the lambs in His arm,
He will carry them in His bosom;
He will gently and carefully lead those nursing their young. 12Who has measured the waters in the hollow of His hand,
And marked off the heavens with a span [of the hand],
And calculated the dust of the earth with a measure,
And weighed the mountains in a balance
And the hills in a pair of scales? 13Who has directed the Spirit of the LORD,
Or has taught Him as His counselor? 14With whom did He consult and who enlightened Him?
Who taught Him the path of justice and taught Him knowledge
And informed Him of the way of understanding? 15In fact, the nations are like a drop from a bucket,
And are regarded as a speck of dust on the scales;
Now look, He lifts up the islands like fine dust. 16And [the forests of] Lebanon cannot supply sufficient fuel to start a fire,
Nor are its wild beasts enough for a burnt offering [worthy of the LORD]. 17All the nations are as nothing before Him,
They are regarded by Him as less than nothing and meaningless. 18To whom then will you liken God?
Or with what likeness will you compare Him? 19As for the cast image (idol), a metalworker casts it,
A goldsmith overlays it with gold
And a silversmith casts its silver chains. 20He who is too impoverished for such an offering [to give to his god]
Chooses a tree that will not rot;
He seeks out for himself a skillful craftsman
To [carve and] set up an idol that will not totter. 21Do you [who worship idols] not know? Have you not heard?
Has it not been told to you from the beginning?
Have you not understood from the foundations of the earth [the omnipotence of God and the stupidity of bowing to idols]? 22It is He who sits above the circle of the earth,
And its inhabitants are like grasshoppers;
[It is He] who stretches out the heavens like a veil
And spreads them out like a tent to dwell in. 23It is He who reduces dignitaries to nothing,
Who makes the judges (rulers) of the earth meaningless (useless). 24Scarcely have they been planted,
Scarcely have they been sown,
Scarcely has their stock taken root in the earth,
But He merely blows on them, and they wither,
And a strong wind carries them away like stubble. 25“To whom then will you compare Me
That I would be his equal?” says the Holy One. 26Lift up your eyes on high
And see who has created these heavenly bodies,
The One who brings out their host by number,
He calls them all by name;
Because of the greatness of His might and the strength of His power,
Not one is missing. 27Why, O Jacob, do you say, and declare, O Israel,
“My way is hidden from the LORD,
And the justice due me escapes the notice of my God”? 28Do you not know? Have you not heard?
The Everlasting God, the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth
Does not become tired or grow weary;
There is no searching of His understanding. 29He gives strength to the weary,
And to him who has no might He increases power. 30Even youths grow weary and tired,
And vigorous young men stumble badly, 31But those who wait for the LORD [who expect, look for, and hope in Him]
Will gain new strength and renew their power;
They will lift up their wings [and rise up close to God] like eagles [rising toward the sun];
They will run and not become weary,
They will walk and not grow tired.

Isaiah 41
Israel Encouraged
1“Listen to Me in silence, you islands and coastlands,
And let the nations gain their strength;
Let them come near, then let them speak;
Let us come together for judgment [and decide the issue between us concerning the enemy from the east]. 2“Who has stirred up and put into action one from the east [the king of Persia, Cyrus the Great]
Whom He calls in righteousness to His service and whom victory meets at every step?
The LORD turns nations over to him
And subdues kings.
He makes them like dust with his sword,
Like wind-driven chaff with his bow. 3“He (Cyrus) pursues them and passes along safely,
By a way his feet had not traveled before. 4“Who has performed and done this,
Calling forth [and guiding the destinies of] the generations [of the nations] from the beginning?
‘I, the LORD—the first, and with the last [existing before history began, the ever-present, unchanging God]—I am He.’” 5The islands and coastlands have seen and they fear;
The ends of the earth tremble;
They have drawn near and have come. 6They each help his neighbor
And say to his brother [as he fashions his idols], “Be of good courage!” 7So the craftsman encourages the goldsmith,
And he who smooths metal with the smith’s hammer encourages him who beats the anvil,
Saying of the soldering (welding), “That is good”;
And he fastens the idol with nails,
So that it will not totter nor be moved. 8“But you, Israel, My servant,
Jacob whom I have chosen,
The offspring of Abraham My friend, 9You whom I [the LORD] have taken from the ends of the earth,
And called from its remotest parts
And said to you, ‘You are My servant,
I have chosen you and have not rejected you [even though you are exiled]. 10‘Do not fear [anything], for I am with you;
Do not be afraid, for I am your God.
I will strengthen you, be assured I will help you;
I will certainly take hold of you with My righteous right hand [a hand of justice, of power, of victory, of salvation].’ 11“Indeed, all those who are angry with you will be put to shame and humiliated;
Those who strive against you will be as nothing and will perish. 12“You shall search for those who quarrel with you, but will not find them;
They who war against you will be as nothing, as nothing at all. 13“For I the LORD your God keep hold of your right hand; [I am the Lord],
Who says to you, ‘Do not fear, I will help you.’ 14“Do not fear, you worm Jacob, you men of Israel;
I will help you,” declares the LORD, “and your Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel. 15“In fact, I have made of you a new, sharp threshing implement with sharp edges;
You will thresh the mountains and crush them,
And make the hills like chaff. 16“You will winnow them, and the wind will carry them away,
And a high wind will scatter them;
But you will rejoice in the LORD,
You will glory in the Holy One of Israel. 17“The poor and needy are seeking water, but there is none;
Their tongues are parched with thirst.
I, the LORD, will answer them Myself;
I, the God of Israel, will not neglect them. 18“I will open rivers on the barren heights
And springs in the midst of the valleys;
I will make the wilderness a reed-pool of water
And the dry land springs of water. 19“I will put the cedar in the wilderness,
The acacia, the myrtle and the olive tree;
I will place the juniper in the desert
Together with the box tree and the cypress, 20So that they may see and know,
And consider and understand together,
That the hand of the LORD has done this,
That the Holy One of Israel has created it. 21“Present your case [for idols made by men’s hands],” says the LORD.
“Produce your evidence [of divinity],”
Says the king of Jacob. 22Let them bring forward [their evidence] and tell us what is going to happen.
Regarding the former events, tell what they were,
That we may consider them and know their outcome;
Or announce to us the things that are going to come. 23Tell us the things that are to come afterward,
That we may know that you are gods;
Indeed, you should do something good or do evil, that we may be afraid and fear [you] together [as we observe the miracle]. 24Hear this! You [idols] are less than nothing,
And your work is worthless;
The worshiper who chooses you [as a god] is repulsive. 25“I have stirred up and put into action one from the north [the king of Persia, Cyrus the Great], and he has come;
From the rising of the sun he will call on My Name [in prayer].
And he will trample on [the Babylonian] officials as on mortar,
Even as a potter treads clay.” 26Who [among the idols] has declared this from the beginning, so that we could know?
Or from earlier times, so that we could say, “He is [unquestionably] right!”?
In fact, there was no one who declared it,
Indeed, there was no one who proclaimed it;
There was no one at all who heard you speak [for you pagan gods are speechless]. 27“I was first to say to Zion, ‘Listen carefully, here they are [the Jews who will be restored to their own land].’
And to Jerusalem, ‘I will provide a messenger (Isaiah) to bring the good news [that Cyrus will be stirred up and put into action to save them].’ 28“But when I look [on the pagan prophets and priests], there is no one [who could predict these events],
And there is no counselor among them,
Who, if I ask, can give an answer. 29“In fact, all of these [pagan prophets and priests] are false;
Their works are worthless,
Their cast images are [merely] wind and emptiness.

Isaiah 42
God’s Promise Concerning His Servant
1“Behold, My Servant, whom I uphold;
My Chosen One in whom My soul delights.
I have put My Spirit upon Him;
He will bring forth justice to the nations. 2“He will not call out or shout aloud,
Nor make His voice heard in the street. 3“A broken reed He will not break [off]
And a dimly burning wick He will not extinguish [He will not harm those who are weak and suffering];
He will faithfully bring forth justice. 4“He will not be disheartened or crushed [in spirit];
[He will persevere] until He has established justice on the earth;
And the coastlands will wait expectantly for His law.”
5This is what God the LORD says, He who created the heavens and stretched them out,
Who spread out the earth and its produce,
Who gives breath to the people on it
And spirit to those who walk on it, 6“I am the LORD, I have called You (the Messiah) in righteousness [for a righteous purpose],
I will also take You by the hand and keep watch over You,
And I will appoint You as a covenant to the people [Israel],
As a light to the nations (Gentiles), 7To open the eyes of the blind,
To bring out prisoners from the dungeon
And those who sit in darkness from the prison. 8“I am the LORD, that is My Name;
My glory I will not give to another,
Nor My praise to carved idols. 9“Indeed, the former things have come to pass,
Now I declare new things;
Before they spring forth I proclaim them to you.” 10Sing to the LORD a new song,
Sing His praise from the end of the earth!
You who go down to the sea, and all that is in it,
You islands and coastlands, and those who inhabit them [sing His praise]! 11Let the wilderness and its cities lift up their voices,
The villages where Kedar lives.
Let the inhabitants of Sela shout for joy,
Let them shout joyfully from the tops of the mountains. 12Let them give glory to the LORD
And declare His praise in the islands and coastlands. 13The LORD will go forth like a warrior,
He will stir up His zeal like a man of war;
He will shout out, yes, He will raise a war cry.
He will prevail [mightily] against His enemies. The Blindness of the People 14“I [the LORD] have been silent for a long time,
I have been still and restrained Myself.
Now I will moan like a woman in labor,
I will both gasp and pant. 15“I will lay waste the mountains and hills
And wither all their vegetation;
I will turn the rivers into coastlands
And dry up the ponds. 16“I will lead the blind by a way they do not know;
I will guide them in paths that they do not know.
I will make darkness into light before them
And rugged places into plains.
These things I will do [for them],
And I will not leave them abandoned or undone.” 17Those who trust in carved idols will be turned back,
And utterly put to shame,
Who say to cast images,
“You are our gods.” 18Hear, you deaf!
And look, you blind, that you may see. 19Who is blind but My servant [Israel],
Or deaf like My messenger whom I send?
Who is blind like the one who is at peace with Me [in a covenant relationship],
Or so blind as the servant of the LORD? 20You have seen many things, but you do not observe them;
Your ears are open, but no one hears. 21The LORD was pleased for His righteousness’ sake
To make the law great and prove to be glorious. 22But this is a people despoiled and plundered;
All of them are trapped in holes,
Or are hidden away in prisons.
They have become a prey with no one to rescue them,
And a spoil, with no one to say, “Give them back!” 23Who among you will listen to this?
Who will listen and pay attention in the time to come? 24Who gave up Jacob [the kingdom of Judah] for spoil, and [the kingdom of] Israel to the plunderers?
Was it not the LORD, He against whom we [of Judah] have sinned,
And in whose ways they [of Israel] were unwilling to walk,
And whose law and teaching they did not obey? 25Therefore He poured out on Israel the heat of His anger
And the fierceness of battle;
And engulfed him in fire,
Yet he did not recognize [the lesson of repentance which the Assyrian conquest was intended to teach];
It burned him, but he did not take it to heart.

Isaiah 43
Israel Redeemed
1But now, this is what the LORD, your Creator says, O Jacob,
And He who formed you, O Israel,
“Do not fear, for I have redeemed you [from captivity];
I have called you by name; you are Mine! 2“When you pass through the waters, I will be with you;
And through the rivers, they will not overwhelm you.
When you walk through fire, you will not be scorched,
Nor will the flame burn you. 3“For I am the LORD your God,
The Holy One of Israel, your Savior;
I have given Egypt [to the Babylonians] as your ransom,
Cush (ancient Ethiopia) and Seba [its province] in exchange for you. 4“Because you are precious in My sight,
You are honored and I love you,
I will give other men in return for you and other peoples in exchange for your life. 5“Do not fear, for I am with you;
I will bring your offspring from the east [where they are scattered],
And gather you from the west. 6“I will say to the north, ‘Give them up!’
And to the south, ‘Do not hold them back.’
Bring My sons from far way
And My daughters from the ends of the earth, 7Everyone who is called by My Name,
Whom I have created for My glory,
Whom I have formed, even whom I have made.” Israel Is God’s Witness 8Bring out the people who are blind, even though they have eyes,
And the deaf, even though they have ears. 9All the nations have gathered together
So that the peoples may be assembled.
Who among them (the idolaters) can predict this [that Judah would return from captivity]
And proclaim to us the former events?
Let them provide their witnesses so that they may be justified,
Or let them hear and say [in acknowledgement], “It is the truth.” 10“You are My witnesses,” declares the LORD,
“And My servant whom I have chosen,
That you may know and believe Me
And understand that I am He.
Before Me there was no God formed,
And there will be none after Me. 11“I, [only] I, am the LORD,
And there is no Savior besides Me. 12“I have declared [the future] and saved [the nation] and proclaimed [that I am God],
And there was no strange (alien) god among you;
Therefore you are My witnesses [among the pagans],” declares the LORD,
“That I am God. 13“Even from eternity I am He,
And there is no one who can rescue from My hand;
I act, and who can revoke or reverse it?”
Babylon to Be Destroyed 14This is what the LORD your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel says, “For your sake I have sent [one] to Babylon,
And I will bring down all of them as fugitives,
Even the Chaldeans [who reign in Babylon], into the ships over which they rejoiced. 15“I am the LORD, your Holy One,
The Creator of Israel, your King.”
16This is what the LORD says, He who makes a way through the sea
And a path through the mighty waters, 17He who brings out the chariot and the horse,
The army and the mighty warrior,
(They will lie down together, they will not rise again;
They have been extinguished, they have been put out like a lamp’s wick): 18“Do not remember the former things,
Or ponder the things of the past. 19“Listen carefully, I am about to do a new thing,
Now it will spring forth;
Will you not be aware of it?
I will even put a road in the wilderness,
Rivers in the desert. 20“The beasts of the field will honor Me,
Jackals and ostriches,
Because I have given waters in the wilderness
And rivers in the desert,
To give drink to My people, My chosen. 21“The people whom I formed for Myself
Will make known My praise. The Shortcomings of Israel 22“Yet you have not called on Me [in prayer and worship], O Jacob;
But you have grown weary of Me, O Israel. 23“You have not brought Me your sheep or goats for your burnt offerings,
Nor honored Me with your sacrifices.
I have not burdened you with offerings,
Nor wearied you with [demands for offerings of] incense. 24“You have not bought Me sweet cane with money,
Nor have you filled Me with the fat of your sacrifices;
But you have burdened Me with your sins,
You have wearied Me with your wickedness. 25“I, only I, am He who wipes out your transgressions for My own sake,
And I will not remember your sins. 26“Remind Me [of your merits with a thorough report], let us plead and argue our case together;
State your position, that you may be proved right. 27“Your first father [Jacob] sinned,
And your spokesmen [the priests and the prophets—your mediators] have transgressed against Me. 28“So I will profane the officials of the sanctuary,
And I will consign Jacob to destruction and [I will subject] Israel to defamation and abuse.

Isaiah 44
The Blessings Of Israel
1“But now listen, O Jacob, My servant,
And Israel, whom I have chosen: 2This is what the LORD who made you
And formed you from the womb, who will help you says,
‘Fear not, O Jacob My servant;
And Jeshurun (Israel, the upright one) whom I have chosen. 3‘For I will pour out water on him who is thirsty,
And streams on the dry ground;
I will pour out My Spirit on your offspring
And My blessing on your descendants; 4And they will spring up among the grass
Like willows by the streams of water.’ 5“One will say, ‘I am the LORD’S’;
And another will name himself after Jacob;
And another will write on his hand, ‘I am the LORD’S,’
And be called by the [honorable] name of Israel.
6“For the LORD, the King of Israel and his Redeemer, the LORD of hosts says this, ‘I am the First and I am the Last;
And there is no God besides Me. 7‘Who is like Me? Let him proclaim it and declare it;
Yes, let him confront Me,
Since I established the people of antiquity.
And let them [those supposed gods] tell those people [who foolishly follow them] the things to come
And the events that are going to take place. 8‘Do not tremble nor be afraid [of the violent upheavals to come];
Have I not long ago proclaimed it to you and declared it?
And you are My witnesses.
Is there a God besides Me?
There is no other Rock;
I know of none.’”
The Folly of Idolatry 9All who make carved idols are nothing. Their precious objects are worthless [to them], and their own witnesses (worshipers) fail to see or know, so that they will be put to shame. 10Who has made a god or cast an idol which is profitable for nothing? 11In fact, all his companions will be put to shame, for the craftsmen themselves are mere men. Let them all assemble, let them stand up, let them be terrified, let them together be put to shame.
12The ironsmith shapes iron and uses a chisel and works it over the coals. He forms the [idol’s] core with hammers and works it with his strong arm. He also becomes hungry and his strength fails; he drinks no water and grows tired. 13The carpenter stretches out a measuring line, he marks out the shape [of the idol] with red chalk; he works it with planes and outlines it with the compass; and he makes it like the form of a man, like the beauty of man, that it may sit in a house. 14He cuts cedars for himself, and takes a cypress or an oak and lets it grow strong for himself among the trees of the forest. He plants a fir, and the rain nourishes it. 15Then it becomes fuel for a man to burn, so he takes one of them and warms himself; he also kindles a fire to bake bread. He also makes a god [from the same wood] and worships it. He makes it into a carved idol [with his own hands] and falls down and worships it! 16He burns half of the wood in the fire; over this half he [cooks and] eats meat, he roasts meat and is satisfied. Also he warms himself and says, “Aha! I am warm, I have seen the fire.” 17But from what is left of the wood he makes a god, his carved idol. He falls down before it, he worships it and prays to it and says, “Save me, for you are my god.”
18They do not know, nor do they understand, for God has muddied their eyes so that they cannot see, and their hearts (minds) as well so that they cannot understand. 19No one remembers, nor has knowledge and understanding [enough] to say [to himself], “I have burned half of this log in the fire, and also baked bread on its coals and have roasted meat and eaten it. Then I make the rest of it into an repulsive thing [to God]; I bow down [to worship] before a block of wood!” 20That kind of man (the idolater) feeds on ashes [and is satisfied with ashes]! A deceived mind has led him astray, so that he cannot save himself, or ask, “Is this thing [that I am holding] in my right hand not a lie?” God Forgives and Redeems 21“Remember [the foolishness of] these things, O Jacob
And Israel, for you are My servant!
I formed you, you are My servant;
O Israel, you will not be forgotten by Me. 22“I have wiped out your transgressions like a thick cloud
And your sins like a heavy mist.
Return to Me, for I have redeemed you.” 23Shout for joy, O heavens, for the LORD has done it!
Shout in triumph, you depths of the earth;
Break forth into jubilant rejoicing, you mountains,
O forest, and every tree in it!
For the LORD has redeemed Jacob,
And He shows His glory in Israel.
24For the LORD, your Redeemer, and He who formed you from the womb says this, “I am the LORD, Maker of all things,
Who alone stretches out the heavens,
Who spreads out the earth by Myself, 25Frustrating the signs and confounding the omens of boasters (false prophets),
Making fools out of fortune-tellers,
Counteracting the wise
And making their knowledge ridiculous, 26Confirming the word of His servant
And carrying out the plan of His messengers.
It is I who says of Jerusalem, ‘She shall [again] be inhabited!’
And of the cities of Judah, ‘They shall [again] be built.’
And I will raise up and restore her ruins. 27“It is I who says to the deep, ‘Be dried up!’
And I will make your rivers dry. 28“It is I who says of Cyrus, ‘He is My shepherd (ruler),
And he will carry out all that I desire—’
Saying of Jerusalem, ‘She shall [again] be built,’
And of the temple, ‘Your foundation shall [again] be laid.’”

Isaiah 45
God Uses Cyrus
1This is what the LORD says to His anointed, to Cyrus [king of Persia],
Whose right hand I have held
To subdue nations before him,
And I will ungird the loins of kings [disarming them];
To open doors before him so that gates will not be shut: 2“I will go before you and level the mountains;
I will shatter the doors of bronze and cut through the bars of iron. 3“I will give you the treasures of darkness [the hoarded treasures]
And the hidden riches of secret places,
So that you may know that it is I,
The LORD, the God of Israel, who calls you (Cyrus the Great) by your name. 4“For the sake of Jacob My servant,
And of Israel My chosen,
I have also called you by your name;
I have given you an honorable name
Though you have not known Me. 5“I am the LORD, and there is no one else;
There is no God except Me.
I will embrace and arm you, though you have not known Me, 6That people may know from the rising to the setting of the sun [the world over]
That there is no one except Me.
I am the LORD, and there is no other, 7The One forming light and creating darkness,
Causing peace and creating disaster;
I am the LORD who does all these things. God’s Supreme Power 8“Rain down, O heavens, from above,
Let the clouds pour down righteousness [all the blessings of God];
Let the earth open up, let salvation bear fruit,
And righteousness spring up with it;
I, the LORD, have created it. 9“Woe (judgment is coming) to him who quarrels with his Maker—
A [worthless] piece of broken pottery among other broken pieces [equally worthless]!
Shall the clay say to the potter, ‘What are you doing?’
Or does the thing say, ‘He has no hands’? 10“Woe (judgment is coming) to him who says to a father, ‘What are you fathering?’
Or to a woman, ‘With what are you in labor?’”
11For the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, and its Maker says this, “Ask Me about the things to come concerning My sons,
And give Me orders concerning the work of My hands. 12“I made the earth and created man upon it.
My hands, stretched out the heavens,
And I commanded all their host. 13“I have stirred up Cyrus and put him into action in righteousness [to accomplish My purpose]
And I will make all his ways smooth;
He will build My city and let My exiles go,
Without any payment or reward,” says the LORD of hosts.
14For this is what the LORD says, “The products of Egypt and the merchandise of Cush (ancient Ethiopia)
And the Sabeans, men of stature,
Will come over to you and they will be yours;
They will walk behind you, in chains [of subjection to you] they will come over,
And they will bow down before you;
They will make supplication to you, [humbly and earnestly] saying,
‘Most certainly God is with you, and there is no other,
No other God [besides Him].’” 15Truly, You are a God who hides Himself,
O God of Israel, Savior! 16They will be put to shame and also humiliated, all of them;
They who make idols will go away together in humiliation. 17Israel has been saved by the LORD
With an everlasting salvation;
You will not be put to shame or humiliated
for all eternity.
18For the LORD, who created the heavens (He is God, who formed the earth and made it; He established it and did not create it to be a wasteland, but formed it to be inhabited) says this, “I am the LORD, and there is no one else. 19“I have not spoken in secret,
In a corner of a land of darkness;
I did not say to the descendants of Jacob,
‘Seek Me in vain [with no benefit for yourselves].’
I, the LORD, speak righteousness [the truth—trustworthy, a straightforward correlation between deeds and words],
Declaring things that are upright. 20“Assemble yourselves and come;
Come together, you survivors of the nations!
They are ignorant,
Who carry around their wooden idols [in religious processions or into battle]
And keep on praying to a god that cannot save them. 21“Declare and present your defense of idols;
Indeed, let them consult together.
Who announced this [rise of Cyrus and his conquests] long before it happened?
Who declared it long ago?
Was it not I, the LORD?
And there is no other God besides Me,
A [consistently and uncompromisingly] just and righteous God and a Savior;
There is none except Me. 22“Turn to Me and be saved, all the ends of the earth;
For I am God, and there is no other. 23“I have sworn [an oath] by Myself,
The word is gone out of My mouth in righteousness
And shall not return,
That to Me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear [allegiance]. 24“It shall be said of Me, ‘Only in the LORD are righteousness and strength.’
To Him people will come,
And all who were angry at Him will be put to shame. 25“In the LORD all the offspring of Israel
Will be justified (declared free of guilt) and will glory [in God].”

Isaiah 46
Babylon’s Idols And The True God
1Bel has bowed down, Nebo stoops over;
Their idols are on the beasts [of burden] and on the cattle.
Your burdens [of idols] are loaded [on them],
Burdens on the weary animals. 2They stooped over, they have bowed down together;
They could not rescue the burden [of their own idols],
But have themselves gone into captivity. 3“Listen to Me,” [says the LORD], “O house of Jacob,
And all the remnant of the house of Israel,
You who have been carried by Me from your birth
And have been carried [in My arms] from the womb, 4Even to your old age I am He,
And even to your advanced old age I will carry you!
I have made you, and I will carry you;
Be assured I will carry you and I will save you. 5“To whom would you liken Me
And make Me equal and compare Me,
That we may be alike? 6“Those who lavish gold from the bag
And weigh out silver on the scales
Hire a goldsmith, and he makes it into a god;
They bow down, indeed they worship it. 7“They lift it on their shoulders [in religious processions or into battle] and carry it;
They set it in its place and there it remains standing.
It cannot move from its place.
Even if one cries to it [for help], the idol cannot answer;
It cannot save him from his distress. 8“Remember this, and take courage;
Take it to heart, you rebellious and disloyal people. 9“Remember [carefully] the former things [which I did] from ages past;
For I am God, and there is no one else;
I am God, and there is no one like Me, 10Declaring the end and the result from the beginning,
And from ancient times the things which have not [yet] been done,
Saying, ‘My purpose will be established,
And I will do all that pleases Me and fulfills My purpose,’ 11Calling a bird of prey from the east,
From a far country, the man (Cyrus) of My purpose.
Truly I have spoken; truly I will bring it to pass.
I have planned it, be assured I will do it. 12“Listen to Me, you stiff-necked people,
You who are far from righteousness (right standing with God). 13“I bring near My righteousness [in the salvation of Israel], it is not far away;
And My salvation will not delay.
And I will grant salvation in Zion,
And My glory for Israel.

Isaiah 47
Lament For Babylon
1“Come down and sit in the dust,
O virgin daughter of Babylon;
Sit on the ground [in abject humiliation]; there is no throne for you,
O daughter of the Chaldeans,
For you will no longer be called tender and delicate. 2“Take millstones [as a female slave does] and grind meal;
Remove your veil, strip off the skirt,
Uncover the leg, cross the rivers [at the command of your captors]. 3“Your nakedness will be uncovered,
Your shame will also be exposed;
I will take vengeance and will spare no man.” 4Our Redeemer [will do all this], the LORD of hosts is His name,
The Holy One of Israel. 5“Sit in silence, and go into darkness,
O daughter of the Chaldeans;
For you will no longer be called
The queen of kingdoms. 6“I was angry with My people,
I profaned [Judah] My inheritance
And gave them into your hand [Babylon].
You showed them no mercy;
You made your yoke very heavy on the aged. 7“And you said, ‘I shall be a queen forevermore.’
You did not consider these things,
Nor did you [seriously] remember the [ultimate] outcome of such conduct. 8“Now, then, hear this, you who live a luxuriant life,
You who dwell safely and securely,
Who say in your heart (mind),
‘I am [the queen], and there is no one besides me.
I shall not sit as a widow,
Nor know the loss of children.’ 9“But these two things shall come to you abruptly, in one day:
Loss of children and widowhood.
They will come on you in full measure
In spite of your many [claims of power through your] sorceries,
In spite of the great power of your enchantments. 10“For you [Babylon] have trusted and felt confident in your wickedness; you have said,
‘No one sees me.’
Your wisdom and your knowledge have led you astray,
And you have said in your heart (mind),
‘I am, and there is no one besides me.’ 11“Therefore disaster will come on you;
You will not know how to make it disappear [with your magic].
And disaster will fall on you
For which you cannot atone [with all your offerings to your gods];
And destruction about which you do not know
Will come on you suddenly. 12“Persist, then, [Babylon] in your enchantments
And your many sorceries
With which you have labored from your youth;
Perhaps you will be able to profit [from them],
Perhaps you may prevail and cause trembling. 13“You are wearied by your many counsels.
Just let the astrologers,
The stargazers,
Those who predict by the new moons [each month]
Stand up and save you from the things that will come upon you [Babylon]. 14“In fact, they are like stubble;
Fire burns them.
They cannot save themselves from the power of the flame [much less save the nation],
There is no blazing coal for warming
Nor fire before which to sit! 15“This is how they have become to you, those [astrologers and sorcerers] with whom you have labored,
Those who have done business with you from your youth;
Each has wandered in his own way.
There is no one to save you.

Isaiah 48
Israel’s Obstinacy
1“Hear this, O house of Jacob, you who are called by the name of Israel
And who come from the seed of Judah,
You who swear [allegiance] by the name of the LORD
And invoke the God of Israel,
But not in truth (sincerity) nor in righteousness [with moral and spiritual integrity]. 2“For they call themselves [citizens of Jerusalem] after the holy city
And depend on the God of Israel;
The LORD of hosts is His name. 3“I have declared the former things [which happened to Israel] in times past;
They went forth from My mouth and I proclaimed them;
Suddenly I acted, and they came to pass. 4“Because I know that you are obstinate,
And your neck is an iron tendon
And your brow is bronze [both unyielding], 5I have declared them to you long ago;
Before they came to pass I announced them to you,
So that you could not say, ‘My idol has done them,
And my carved image and my cast image have commanded them.’ 6“You have heard [these things foretold]; look at all this [that has been fulfilled].
And you, will you not declare it?
I proclaim to you [specific] new things from this time,
Even hidden things which you have not known. 7“They are created now [called into being by the prophetic word] and not long ago;
And before today you have not heard of them,
So that you will not say, ‘Oh yes! I knew them.’ 8“You have not heard, you have not known;
Even from long ago your ear has not been open.
For I [the LORD] knew that you [Israel] would act very treacherously;
You have been called a transgressor and a rebel from birth. 9“For the sake of My Name I refrain from My wrath,
And for My praise I restrain Myself from you,
So that I do not cut you off. 10“Indeed, I have refined you, but not as silver;
I have tested and chosen you in the furnace of affliction. 11“For My own sake, for My own sake, I will do it [I refrain and do not completely destroy you];
For how can My Name be defiled and profaned [as it would if My chosen people were completely destroyed]?
And I will not give My glory to another [by permitting the worshipers of idols to triumph over you]. End of Captivity Promised 12“Listen to Me, O Jacob, and Israel, whom I called;
I am He, I am the First, I am the Last. 13“My hand founded and established the earth,
And My right hand spread out the heavens;
When I call to them, they stand together [in obedience to carry out My decrees]. 14“Assemble, all of you, and listen!
Who among them [the idols and Chaldean astrologers] has declared these things?
The LORD loves him (Cyrus of Persia); he will do His pleasure and purpose against Babylon,
And his arm will be against the Chaldeans [who reign in Babylon]. 15“I, even I, have spoken; indeed, I have called Cyrus;
I have brought him, and will make his way successful. 16“Come near to Me, listen to this:
From the beginning I have not spoken in secret,
From the time that it happened, I was there.
And now the Lord GOD has sent Me, and His [Holy] Spirit.”
17This is what the LORD, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel says, “I am the LORD your God, who teaches you to profit (benefit),
Who leads you in the way that you should go. 18“Oh, that you had paid attention to My commandments!
Then your peace and prosperity would have been like a [flowing] river,
And your righteousness [the holiness and purity of the nation] like the [abundant] waves of the sea. 19“Your offspring would have been like the sand,
And your descendants [in number] like the grains of sand;
Their name would never be cut off or destroyed from My presence.” 20Get out of Babylon! Flee from the Chaldeans [who reign there]!
Declare with a voice of jubilation, proclaim this,
Send it out to the end of the earth;
Say, “The LORD has redeemed His servant Jacob.” 21They did not thirst when He led them through the deserts.
He made the waters flow out of the rock for them;
He split the rock and the waters flowed. 22“There is no peace for the wicked,” says the LORD.

Isaiah 49
Salvation Reaches To The End Of The Earth
1Listen to Me, O islands and coastlands,
And pay attention, you peoples from far away.
The LORD has called Me from the womb;
From the body of My mother He has named Me. 2He has made My mouth like a sharp sword,
In the shadow of His hand He has kept Me hidden;
And He has made Me a sharpened arrow,
In His quiver He has hidden Me. 3And [the LORD] said to Me, “You are My Servant, Israel,
In Whom I will show My glory.” 4Then I said, “I have labored in vain,
I have spent My strength for nothing and vanity (pride, uselessness);
However My justice is with the LORD,
And My reward is with My God.” 5And now says the LORD, who formed Me from the womb to be His Servant,
To bring Jacob back to Him and that Israel might be gathered to Him,
—For I am honored in the eyes of the LORD,
And My God is My strength— 6He says, “It is too trivial a thing that You should be My Servant
To raise up the tribes of Jacob and to restore the survivors of Israel;
I will also make You a light to the nations
That My salvation may reach to the end of the earth.” 7This is what the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, Israel’s Holy One says,
To the thoroughly despised One,
To the One hated by the nation
To the Servant of rulers,
“Kings will see and arise,
Princes shall also bow down,
Because of the LORD who is faithful, the Holy One of Israel who has chosen You.” 8This is what the LORD says,
“In a favorable time I have answered You,
And in a day of salvation I have helped You;
And I will keep watch over You and give You for a covenant of the people,
To restore the land [from its present state of ruin] and to apportion and give as inheritances the deserted hereditary lands, 9Saying to those who are bound and captured, ‘Go forth,’
And to those who are in [spiritual] darkness, ‘Show yourselves [come into the light of the Savior].’
They will feed along the roads [on which they travel],
And their pastures will be on all the bare heights. 10“They will not hunger or thirst,
Nor will the scorching heat or sun strike them down;
For He who has compassion on them will lead them,
And He will guide them to springs of water. 11“And I will make all My mountains a roadway,
And My highways will be raised. 12“In fact, these will come from far away;
And, lo, these shall come from the north and from the west,
And these from the land of Aswan (southern Egypt).” 13Shout for joy, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth,
And break forth into singing, O mountains!
For the LORD has comforted His people
And will have compassion on His afflicted. Promise to Zion 14But Zion (Jerusalem in captivity) said, “The LORD has abandoned me,
And my Lord has forgotten me.” 15[The LORD answered] “Can a woman forget her nursing child
And have no compassion on the son of her womb?
Even these may forget, but I will not forget you. 16“Indeed, I have inscribed [a picture of] you on the palms of My hands;
Your city walls [Zion] are continually before Me. 17“Your builders hurry;
Your destroyers and devastators
Will go away from you. 18“Lift up your eyes and look around [at the returning exiles];
All these gather together and they come to you [to rebuild you].
As I live,” declares the LORD,
“You [Zion] will indeed clothe yourself with all of them as jewels and tie them on as a bride. 19“For your ruins and desolate places and your land [once the scene] of destruction—
Certainly now [in the coming years] will be too cramped for the inhabitants,
And those who once engulfed you will be far away. 20“The children of your bereavement [those born in captivity] will yet say in your ears,
‘The place is too cramped for me’;
Make room for me that I may live here. 21“Then [Zion], you will say in your heart,
‘Who has borne me these children,
Since I have been bereaved of my children
And am barren, an exile and a wanderer?
And who has reared these?
Indeed, I was left alone;
From where then did these children come?’”
22This is what the Lord GOD says, “Listen carefully, I will lift up My hand to the [Gentile] nations
And set up My banner to the peoples;
And they will bring your sons in the fold of their garments,
And your daughters will be carried on their shoulders. 23“Kings will be your attendants,
And their princesses your nurses.
They will bow down to you with their faces to the earth
And lick the dust of your feet;
And you shall know [with an understanding based on personal experience] that I am the LORD;
For they shall not be put to shame who wait and hope expectantly for Me. 24“Can the spoils of war be taken from the mighty man,
Or the captives of a tyrant be rescued?”
25Indeed, this is what the LORD says, “Even the captives of the mighty man will be taken away,
And the tyrant’s spoils of war will be rescued;
For I will contend with your opponent,
And I will save your children. 26“I will make those who oppress you consume their own flesh [in mutually destructive wars]
And they will become drunk with their own blood as with sweet wine;
And all mankind will know [with a knowledge grounded in personal experience] that I, the LORD, am your Savior
And your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.”

Isaiah 50
God Helps His Servant
1The LORD declares this; “Where is the certificate of divorce
By which I have sent your mother away, [O Israel]?
Or to which one of My creditors did I sell you [as slaves]?
In fact, You were sold for your wickedness [your sin, your injustice, your wrongdoing],
And for your transgressions your mother was sent away. 2“Why, when I came, was there no man [to greet Me]?
When I called, why was there no one to answer?
Is My hand really so short that it cannot redeem [My servants]?
Or have I no power to rescue?
Listen carefully, with My rebuke I dry up the sea,
I make the rivers into a desert;
Their fish stink because there is no water
And die of thirst. 3“I clothe the heavens with the blackness [of storm clouds]
And make sackcloth [of mourning] their clothing.” 4The Lord GOD has given Me [His Servant] the tongue of disciples [as One who is taught],
That I may know how to sustain the weary with a word.
He awakens Me morning by morning,
He awakens My ear to listen as a disciple [as One who is taught]. 5The Lord GOD has opened My ear,
And I have not been rebellious
Nor have I turned back. 6I turned My back to those who strike Me,
And My cheeks to those who pluck out the beard;
I did not hide My face from insults and spitting. 7For the Lord GOD helps Me,
Therefore, I have not been ashamed or humiliated.
Therefore, I have made My face like flint,
And I know that I shall not be put to shame. 8He who declares Me in the right is near;
Who will [dare to] contend with Me?
Let us stand up to each other;
Who is My adversary?
Let him approach Me. 9In fact, the Lord GOD helps Me;
Who is he who condemns Me [as guilty]?
Indeed, they will all wear out like a garment;
The moth will eat them. 10Who is among you who fears the LORD,
Who obeys the voice of His Servant,
Yet who walks in darkness and has no light?
Let him trust and be confident in the name of the LORD and let him rely on his God. 11Listen carefully, all you who kindle your own fire [devising your own man-made plan of salvation],
Who surround yourselves with torches,
Walk by the light of your [self-made] fire
And among the torches that you have set ablaze.
But this you will have from My hand:
You will lie down in [a place of] torment.

Isaiah 51
Israel Exhorted
1“Listen to Me, you who pursue righteousness (right standing with God),
Who seek and inquire of the LORD:
Look to the rock from which you were cut
And to the excavation of the quarry from which you were dug. 2“Look to Abraham your father
And to Sarah who gave birth to you in pain;
For I called him when he was but one,
Then I blessed him and made him many.” 3For the LORD will comfort Zion [in her captivity];
He will comfort all her ruins.
And He will make her wilderness like Eden,
And her desert like the garden of the LORD;
Joy and gladness will be found in her,
Thanksgiving and the voice of a melody. 4“Listen carefully to Me [says the LORD], O My people,
And hear Me, O My nation;
For a [divine] law will go forth from Me,
And I will quickly establish My justice as a light to the peoples. 5“My righteousness (justice) is near, My salvation has gone forth,
And My arms will judge the peoples;
The islands and coastlands will wait for Me,
And they will wait with hope and confident expectation for My arm. 6“Lift up your eyes to the heavens,
Then look to the earth beneath;
For the heavens will be torn to pieces and vanish like smoke,
And the earth will wear out like a garment
And its inhabitants will die in like manner.
But My salvation will be forever,
And My righteousness (justice) [and faithfully fulfilled promise] will not be broken. 7“Listen to Me, you who know righteousness (right standing with God),
The people in whose heart is My law and instruction;
Do not fear the reproach and taunting of man,
Nor be distressed at their reviling. 8“For the moth will eat them like a garment,
And the worm will eat them like wool.
But My righteousness and justice [faithfully promised] will exist forever,
And My salvation to all generations.” 9Awake, awake, put on strength and might, O arm of the LORD;
Awake as in the ancient days, as in the generations of long ago.
Was it not You who cut Rahab (Egypt) in pieces,
Who pierced the dragon [of Egypt]? 10Was it not You who dried up the [Red] Sea,
The waters of the great deep,
Who made the depths of the sea a pathway
For the redeemed to cross over? 11So the redeemed of the LORD will return
And come with joyful shouting to Zion;
Everlasting joy will be on their heads.
They will obtain gladness and joy,
And sorrow and sighing will flee away. 12“I, even I, am He who comforts you.
Who are you that you are afraid of man who dies
And of a son of man who is made [as destructible] as grass, 13That you have forgotten the LORD your Maker,
Who stretched out the heavens
And laid the foundations of the earth,
That you continually tremble with fear all day long because of the rage of the oppressor,
As he takes aim to destroy?
And where is the rage of the oppressor?
14The [captive] exile will soon be set free, and will not die in the dungeon, nor will his food be lacking. 15For I am the LORD your God, who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar—the LORD of hosts is His name. 16“I have put My words in your mouth and have covered you with the shadow of My hand, to establish the [renewed] heavens and lay the foundations of the [renewed] earth, and to say to Zion (Jerusalem), ‘You are My people.’” 17Wake yourself up! Wake yourself up! Stand up, O Jerusalem,
You who have drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of His wrath,
You who have drunk the cup of staggering and intoxication to the dregs [leaving only sediment]. 18There is no one to guide her among all the sons she has borne,
Nor is there anyone to take her by the hand among all the sons she has reared. 19These two tragedies have befallen you;
Who will show sympathy for you and mourn with you?
The desolation and destruction [on the land and city], famine and sword [on the inhabitants];
How shall I comfort you? 20Your sons have fainted;
They lie helpless at the head of every street,
Like an antelope in a net,
Full [from drinking] of the wrath of the LORD,
The rebuke of your God. 21Therefore, now hear this, you who are afflicted,
Who are drunk, but not with wine [but overwhelmed by the wrath of God]. 22So says your Lord, the LORD, who is also your God
Who pleads the cause of His people,
“Listen carefully, I have taken from your hand the cup of staggering and intoxication,
The cup of My wrath;
You shall never drink it again. 23“I will put it into the hands of your tormentors,
Who have said to you, ‘Lie down so that we may walk over you.’
You have even made your back like the ground
And like the street for those who walk over it.”

Isaiah 52
Cheer For Downtrodden Zion
1Awake, awake,
Put on your strength, O Zion;
Put on your beautiful garments,
O Jerusalem, the holy city;
For the uncircumcised and the unclean
Will no longer come into you. 2Shake yourself from the dust, arise,
O captive Jerusalem;
Rid yourself of the chains around your neck,
O captive Daughter of Zion.
3For the LORD says this, “You were sold for nothing and you will be redeemed, but not with money.” 4For the Lord GOD says this, “My people went down at the first into Egypt to live there; and [many years later Sennacherib] the Assyrian oppressed them without cause. 5“But now, what do I have here,” declares the LORD, “seeing that My people have been taken away without reason? Those who rule over them howl [with taunting and mockery of salvation],” declares the LORD, “and My name is continually blasphemed all day long. 6“Therefore My people shall know My Name and what it means. Therefore in that day I am the One who is speaking, ‘Here I am.’” 7How beautiful and delightful on the mountains
Are the feet of him who brings good news,
Who announces peace,
Who brings good news of good [things],
Who announces salvation,
Who says to Zion, “Your God reigns!” 8Listen! Your watchmen lift up their voices,
Together they shout for joy;
For they will see face to face
The return of the LORD to Zion. 9Break forth, shout joyfully together,
You ruins of Jerusalem;
For the LORD has comforted His people,
He has redeemed Jerusalem. 10The LORD has bared His holy arm (His infinite power)
Before the eyes of all the nations [revealing Himself as the One by Whom Israel is redeemed from captivity],
That all the ends of the earth may see
The salvation of our God. 11Depart, depart, go out from there (the lands of exile),
Touch no unclean thing;
Go out of the midst of her (Babylon), purify yourselves,
You who carry the articles of the LORD [on your journey from there]. 12For you will not go out in a hurry [as when you left Egypt],
Nor will you go in flight [fleeing, as you did from the Egyptians];
For the LORD will go before you,
And the God of Israel will be your rear guard. The Exalted Servant 13Indeed, My Servant (the Messiah) will act wisely and prosper;
He will be raised and lifted up and greatly exalted. 14Just as many were astonished and appalled at you, My people,
So His appearance was marred more than any man
And His form [marred] more than the sons of men. 15So He will sprinkle many nations [with His blood, providing salvation],
Kings will shut their mouths because of Him;
For what they had not been told they will see,
And what they had not heard they will understand.

Isaiah 53
The Suffering Servant
1Who has believed [confidently trusted in, relied on, and adhered to] our message [of salvation]?
And to whom [if not us] has the arm and infinite power of the LORD been revealed? 2For He [the Servant of God] grew up before Him like a tender shoot (plant),
And like a root out of dry ground;
He has no stately form or majestic splendor
That we would look at Him,
Nor [handsome] appearance that we would be attracted to Him. 3He was despised and rejected by men,
A Man of sorrows and pain and acquainted with grief;
And like One from whom men hide their faces
He was despised, and we did not appreciate His worth or esteem Him. 4But [in fact] He has borne our griefs,
And He has carried our sorrows and pains;
Yet we [ignorantly] assumed that He was stricken,
Struck down by God and degraded and humiliated [by Him]. 5But He was wounded for our transgressions,
He was crushed for our wickedness [our sin, our injustice, our wrongdoing];
The punishment [required] for our well-being fell on Him,
And by His stripes (wounds) we are healed. 6All of us like sheep have gone astray,
We have turned, each one, to his own way;
But the LORD has caused the wickedness of us all [our sin, our injustice, our wrongdoing]
To fall on Him [instead of us]. 7He was oppressed and He was afflicted,
Yet He did not open His mouth [to complain or defend Himself];
Like a lamb that is led to the slaughter,
And like a sheep that is silent before her shearers,
So He did not open His mouth. 8After oppression and judgment He was taken away;
And as for His generation [His contemporaries], who [among them] concerned himself with the fact
That He was cut off from the land of the living [by His death]
For the transgression of my people, to whom the stroke [of death] was due? 9His grave was assigned with the wicked,
But He was with a rich man in His death,
Because He had done no violence,
Nor was there any deceit in His mouth. 10Yet the LORD was willing
To crush Him, causing Him to suffer;
If He would give Himself as a guilt offering [an atonement for sin],
He shall see His [spiritual] offspring,
He shall prolong His days,
And the will (good pleasure) of the LORD shall succeed and prosper in His hand. 11As a result of the anguish of His soul,
He shall see it and be satisfied;
By His knowledge [of what He has accomplished] the Righteous One,
My Servant, shall justify the many [making them righteous—upright before God, in right standing with Him],
For He shall bear [the responsibility for] their sins. 12Therefore, I will divide and give Him a portion with the great [kings and rulers],
And He shall divide the spoils with the mighty,
Because He [willingly] poured out His life to death,
And was counted among the transgressors;
Yet He Himself bore and took away the sin of many,
And interceded [with the Father] for the transgressors.

Isaiah 54
The Fertility Of Zion
1“Shout for joy, O barren one, she who has not given birth;
Break forth into joyful shouting and rejoice, she who has not gone into labor [with child]!
For the [spiritual] sons of the desolate one will be more numerous
Than the sons of the married woman,” says the LORD. 2“Enlarge the site of your tent [to make room for more children];
Stretch out the curtains of your dwellings, do not spare them;
Lengthen your tent ropes
And make your pegs (stakes) firm [in the ground]. 3“For you will spread out to the right and to the left;
And your descendants will take possession of nations
And will inhabit deserted cities. 4“Do not fear, for you will not be put to shame,
And do not feel humiliated or ashamed, for you will not be disgraced.
For you will forget the shame of your youth,
And you will no longer remember the disgrace of your widowhood. 5“For your husband is your Maker,
The LORD of hosts is His name;
And your Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel,
Who is called the God of the whole earth. 6“For the LORD has called you,
Like a wife who has been abandoned, grieved in spirit,
And like a wife [married] in her youth when she is [later] rejected and scorned,”
Says your God. 7“For a brief moment I abandoned you,
But with great compassion and mercy I will gather you [to Myself again]. 8“In an outburst of wrath
I hid My face from you for a moment,
But with everlasting kindness I will have compassion on you,”
Says the LORD your Redeemer. 9“For this is like the waters of Noah to Me,
As I swore [an oath] that the waters of Noah
Would not flood the earth again;
In the same way I have sworn that I will not be angry with you
Nor will I rebuke you. 10“For the mountains may be removed and the hills may shake,
But My lovingkindness will not be removed from you,
Nor will My covenant of peace be shaken,”
Says the LORD who has compassion on you. 11“O you afflicted [city], storm-tossed, and not comforted,
Listen carefully, I will set your [precious] stones in mortar,
And lay your foundations with sapphires. 12“And I will make your battlements of rubies,
And your gates of [shining] beryl stones,
And all your [barrier] walls of precious stones. 13“And all your [spiritual] sons will be disciples [of the LORD],
And great will be the well-being of your sons. 14“You will be firmly established in righteousness:
You will be far from [even the thought of] oppression, for you will not fear,
And from terror, for it will not come near you. 15“If anyone fiercely attacks you it will not be from Me.
Whoever attacks you will fall because of you. 16“Listen carefully, I have created the smith who blows on the fire of coals
And who produces a weapon for its purpose;
And I have created the destroyer to inflict ruin. 17“No weapon that is formed against you will succeed;
And every tongue that rises against you in judgment you will condemn.
This [peace, righteousness, security, and triumph over opposition] is the heritage of the servants of the LORD,
And this is their vindication from Me,” says the LORD.

Isaiah 55
The Free Offer Of Mercy
1“Everyone who thirsts, come to the waters;
And you who have no money come, buy grain and eat.
Come, buy wine and milk
Without money and without cost [simply accept it as a gift from God]. 2“Why do you spend money for that which is not bread,
And your earnings for what does not satisfy?
Listen carefully to Me, and eat what is good,
And let your soul delight in abundance. 3“Incline your ear [to listen] and come to Me;
Hear, so that your soul may live;
And I will make an everlasting covenant with you,
According to the faithful mercies [promised and] shown to David. 4“Listen carefully, I have appointed him [David, representing the Messiah] to be a witness to the nations [regarding salvation],
A leader and commander to the peoples. 5“In fact, you [Israel] will call a nation that you do not know,
And a nation that does not know you will run to you,
Because of the LORD your God, even the Holy One of Israel;
For He has glorified you.” 6Seek the LORD while He may be found;
Call on Him [for salvation] while He is near. 7Let the wicked leave (behind) his way
And the unrighteous man his thoughts;
And let him return to the LORD,
And He will have compassion (mercy) on him,
And to our God,
For He will abundantly pardon. 8“For My thoughts are not your thoughts,
Nor are your ways My ways,” declares the LORD. 9“For as the heavens are higher than the earth,
So are My ways higher than your ways
And My thoughts higher than your thoughts. 10“For as the rain and snow come down from heaven,
And do not return there without watering the earth,
Making it bear and sprout,
And providing seed to the sower and bread to the eater, 11So will My word be which goes out of My mouth;
It will not return to Me void (useless, without result),
Without accomplishing what I desire,
And without succeeding in the matter for which I sent it. 12“For you will go out [from exile] with joy
And be led forth [by the LORD Himself] with peace;
The mountains and the hills will break forth into shouts of joy before you,
And all the trees of the field will clap their hands. 13“Instead of the thorn bush the cypress tree will grow,
And instead of the nettle the myrtle tree will grow;
And it will be a memorial to the LORD,
For an everlasting sign [of His mercy] which will not be cut off.”

Isaiah 56
Rewards For Obedience To God
1This is what the LORD says,
“Maintain justice and do righteousness,
For My salvation is soon to come,
And My righteousness and justice is soon to be revealed. 2“Blessed (happy, fortunate) is the man who does this,
And the son of man who takes hold of it,
Who keeps the Sabbath without profaning it,
And keeps his hand from doing any evil.” 3Do not let the foreigner who has joined himself to the LORD say,
“The LORD will most certainly separate me from His people.”
And do not let the eunuch say, “Look, I am a dry tree.”
4This is what the LORD says, “To the eunuchs who keep My Sabbaths
And choose what pleases Me,
And hold firmly to My covenant, 5To them I will give in My house and within My walls a memorial,
And a name better than that of sons and daughters;
I will give them an everlasting name which will not be cut off. 6“Also the foreigners who join themselves to the LORD,
To minister to Him, and to love the name of the LORD,
To be His servants, everyone who keeps the Sabbath without profaning it
And holds fast to My covenant [by conscientious obedience]; 7All these I will bring to My holy mountain
And make them joyful in My house of prayer.
Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on My altar;
For My house will be called a house of prayer for all the peoples.” 8The Lord GOD, who gathers the dispersed of Israel, declares:
“I will gather yet others to them (Israel), to those [already] gathered.” 9All you beasts of the field,
All you beasts (hostile nations) in the forest,
Come to eat. 10Israel’s watchmen are blind,
They are all without knowledge.
They are all mute dogs, they cannot bark;
Panting, lying down, they love to slumber. 11And the dogs are greedy; they never have enough.
They are shepherds who have no understanding;
They have all turned to their own way,
Each one to his unlawful gain, without exception. 12“Come,” [they say,] “let us get wine, and let us fill ourselves with strong drink;
And tomorrow will be like today, very great indeed.”

Isaiah 57
Evil Leaders Rebuked
1The righteous man perishes [at the hand of evil], and no one takes it to heart;
Faithful and devout men are taken away, while no one understands
That the righteous person is taken away [to be spared] from disaster and evil. 2He enters into peace [through death];
They rest in their beds (graves),
Each one who walked uprightly [following God’s will, living with integrity]. 3“But come here, you sons of a sorceress [raised in deception and superstition],
Offspring of an adulterer and a prostitute. 4“Of whom do you make fun?
Against whom do you open wide your mouth
And stick out your tongue?
Are you not children of rebellion (sin),
Offspring of deceit, 5Who inflame yourselves [with lust in pagan rites] among the oaks (terebinth trees),
Under every green and leafy tree,
Who slaughter the children [in sacrifice] in the ravines
Under the clefts of the rocks? 6“Among the smooth stones of the ravine
Is your portion, they (the idols) are your lot;
Even to them you have poured out a drink offering,
You have offered a grain offering.
Should I be quiet concerning these things [leaving them unpunished—bearing them with patience]? 7“Upon a high and lofty mountain
You have [openly and shamelessly] made your [idolatrous and adulterous] bed;
Even there you went up to offer sacrifice [to idols, in spiritual unfaithfulness to Me]. 8“Behind the door and the doorpost
You have set up your [pagan] symbol;
Indeed, far removed from Me, you have uncovered yourself,
And have gone up and made your bed wide.
And you have made a [new] agreement for yourself with the adulterers,
You have loved their bed,
You have looked [with passion] on their manhood. 9“You have gone to the king [of a pagan land] with oil
And increased your perfumes;
You have sent your messengers a great distance
And made them go down to Sheol (the realm of the dead). 10“You were wearied by the length of your road,
Yet you did not say, ‘It is no use.’
You found renewed strength,
Therefore you did not grow weak. 11“About whom were you worried and fearful
That you lied and did not remember Me,
Nor give Me a thought?
Was I not silent even for a long time
And [as a result] you do not fear Me? 12“I will declare your [hypocritical] righteousness and your deeds,
But they will not benefit you. 13“When you cry out [for help], let your [ridiculous] collection of idols save you.
But the wind will carry them all away,
A [mere] breath will take them.
But he who takes refuge in Me will possess the land [Judea]
And will inherit My holy mountain.” 14And it will be said,
“Build up, build up, clear the way.
Remove the stumbling block out of the way [of the spiritual return] of My people.” 15For the high and exalted One
He who inhabits eternity, Whose name is Holy says this,
“I dwell on the high and holy place,
But also with the contrite and humble in spirit
In order to revive the spirit of the humble
And to revive the heart of the contrite [overcome with sorrow for sin]. 16“For I will not contend forever,
Nor will I always be angry;
For [if I did stay angry] the spirit [of man] would grow weak before Me,
And the breath of those whom I have created. 17“Because of the wickedness of his unjust gain I was angry and struck him;
I hid My face and was angry,
And he went on turning away and backsliding, in the way of his [own willful] heart. 18“I have seen his [willful] ways, but I will heal him;
I will lead him [also] and will restore comfort to him and to those who mourn for him, 19As I create the praise of his lips,
Peace, peace, to him who is far away [both Jew and Gentile] and to him who is near!”
Says the LORD;
“And I will heal him [making his lips blossom anew with thankful praise].” 20But the wicked are like the tossing sea,
For it cannot be quiet,
And its waters toss up mire and mud. 21“There is no peace,” says my God, “for the wicked.”

Isaiah 58
Observances Of Fasts
1“Cry aloud, do not hold back;
Lift up your voice like a trumpet,
And declare to My people their transgression
And to the house of Jacob their sins. 2“Yet they seek Me day by day and delight [superficially] to know My ways,
As [if they were in reality] a nation that has done righteousness
And has not abandoned (turned away from) the ordinance of their God.
They ask of Me righteous judgments,
They delight in the nearness of God. 3‘Why have we fasted,’ they say, ‘and You do not see it?
Why have we humbled ourselves and You do not notice?’
Hear this [O Israel], on the day of your fast [when you should be grieving for your sins] you find something you desire [to do],
And you force your hired servants to work [instead of stopping all work, as the law teaches]. 4“The facts are that you fast only for strife and brawling and to strike with the fist of wickedness.
You do not fast as you do today to make your voice heard on high. 5“Is a fast such as this what I have chosen, a day for a man to humble himself [with sorrow in his soul]?
Is it only to bow down his head like a reed
And to make sackcloth and ashes as a bed [pretending to have a repentant heart]?
Do you call this a fast and a day pleasing to the LORD? 6“[Rather] is this not the fast which I choose,
To undo the bonds of wickedness,
To tear to pieces the ropes of the yoke,
To let the oppressed go free
And break apart every [enslaving] yoke? 7“Is it not to divide your bread with the hungry
And bring the homeless poor into the house;
When you see the naked, that you cover him,
And not to hide yourself from [the needs of] your own flesh and blood? 8“Then your light will break out like the dawn,
And your healing (restoration, new life) will quickly spring forth;
Your righteousness will go before you [leading you to peace and prosperity],
The glory of the LORD will be your rear guard. 9“Then you will call, and the LORD will answer;
You will cry for help, and He will say, ‘Here I am.’
If you take away from your midst the yoke [of oppression],
The finger pointed in scorn [toward the oppressed or the godly], and [every form of] wicked (sinful, unjust) speech, 10And if you offer yourself to [assist] the hungry
And satisfy the need of the afflicted,
Then your light will rise in darkness
And your gloom will become like midday. 11“And the LORD will continually guide you,
And satisfy your soul in scorched and dry places,
And give strength to your bones;
And you will be like a watered garden,
And like a spring of water whose waters do not fail. 12“And your people will rebuild the ancient ruins;
You will raise up and restore the age-old foundations [of buildings that have been laid waste];
You will be called Repairer of the Breach,
Restorer of Streets with Dwellings. Keeping the Sabbath 13“If you turn back your foot from [unnecessary travel on] the Sabbath,
From doing your own pleasure on My holy day,
And call the Sabbath a [spiritual] delight, and the holy day of the LORD honorable,
And honor it, not going your own way
Or engaging in your own pleasure
Or speaking your own [idle] words, 14Then you will take pleasure in the LORD,
And I will make you ride on the high places of the earth,
And I will feed you with the [promised] heritage of Jacob your father;
For the mouth of the LORD has spoken.”

Isaiah 59
Separation From God
1Behold, the LORD’S hand is not so short
That it cannot save,
Nor His ear so impaired
That it cannot hear. 2But your wickedness has separated you from your God,
And your sins have hidden His face from you so that He does not hear. 3For your hands are defiled with blood
And your fingers with wickedness [with sin, with injustice, with wrongdoing];
Your lips have spoken lies,
Your tongue mutters wickedness. 4No one sues righteously [but for the sake of doing injury to others—to take some undue advantage], and no one pleads [his case] in truth; [but rather]
They trust in empty arguments and speak lies;
They conceive trouble and bring forth injustice. 5They hatch vipers’ eggs and weave the spider’s webs;
He who eats of their eggs dies,
And from an egg which is crushed a viper breaks out. 6Their webs will not serve as clothing,
Nor will they cover themselves with what they make;
Their works are works of wickedness [of sin, of injustice, of wrongdoing],
And the act of violence is in their hands. 7Their feet run to evil,
And they rush to shed innocent blood.
Their thoughts are thoughts of wickedness [of sin, of injustice, of wrongdoing];
Devastation and destruction are in their highways. 8They do not know the way of peace,
And there is no justice in their tracks.
They have made them into crooked paths;
Whoever walks on them does not know peace. A Confession of Wickedness 9Therefore justice is far from us,
And righteousness does not overtake us.
We [expectantly] hope for light, but only see darkness;
We hope for gleam of light, but we walk in darkness and gloom. 10We grope for a wall like the blind,
We grope like those who have no eyes.
We stumble at midday as in the twilight;
Among those who are healthy we are like dead men. 11We all groan and growl like bears,
And coo sadly like doves;
We hope for justice, but there is none,
For salvation, but it is far from us. 12For our transgressions are multiplied before You [O LORD],
And our sins testify against us;
For our transgressions are with us,
And we know and recognize our wickedness [our sin, our injustice, our wrongdoing]: 13Rebelling against and denying the LORD,
Turning away from [following] our God,
Speaking oppression and revolt,
Conceiving and muttering from the heart lying words. 14Justice is pushed back,
And righteous behavior stands far away;
For truth has fallen in the city square,
And integrity cannot enter. 15Yes, truth is missing;
And he who turns away from evil makes himself a prey.
Now the LORD saw it,
And it displeased Him that there was no justice. 16He saw that there was no man,
And was amazed that there was no one to intercede [on behalf of truth and right];
Therefore His own arm brought salvation to Him,
And His own righteousness sustained Him. 17For He [the LORD] put on righteousness like a coat of armor,
And salvation like a helmet on His head;
He put on garments of vengeance for clothing
And covered Himself with zeal [and great love for His people] as a cloak. 18As their deeds deserve, so He will repay:
Wrath to His adversaries, retribution to His enemies;
To the islands and coastlands He will repay. 19So they will fear the name of the LORD from the west
And His glory from the rising of the sun.
For He will come in like a narrow, rushing stream
Which the breath of the LORD drives [overwhelming the enemy]. 20“A Redeemer (Messiah) will come to Zion,
And to those in Jacob (Israel) who turn from transgression (sin),” declares the LORD.
21“As for Me, this is My covenant with them,” says the LORD: “My Spirit which is upon you [writing the law of God on the heart], and My words which I have put in your mouth shall not depart from your mouth, nor from the mouths of your [true, spiritual] children, nor from the mouth of your children’s children,” says the LORD, “from now and forever.”

Isaiah 60
A Glorified Zion
1“Arise [from spiritual depression to a new life], shine [be radiant with the glory and brilliance of the LORD]; for your light has come,
And the glory and brilliance of the LORD has risen upon you. 2“For in fact, darkness will cover the earth
And deep darkness will cover the peoples;
But the LORD will rise upon you [Jerusalem]
And His glory and brilliance will be seen on you. 3“Nations will come to your light,
And kings to the brightness of your rising. 4“Lift up your eyes around you and see;
They all gather together, they come to you.
Your sons will come from far away,
And your daughters will be looked after at their side. 5“Then you will see and be radiant,
And your heart will tremble [with joy] and rejoice
Because the abundant wealth of the seas will be brought to you,
The wealth of the nations will come to you. 6“A multitude of camels [from the eastern trading tribes] will cover you [Jerusalem],
The young camels of Midian and Ephah;
All those from Sheba [who once came to trade] will come
Bringing gold and frankincense
And proclaiming the praises of the LORD. 7“All the flocks of Kedar will be gathered to you [as the eastern pastoral tribes join the trading tribes],
The rams of Nebaioth will serve you;
They will go up with acceptance [as sacrifices] on My altar,
And I will glorify the house of My honor and splendor. 8“Who are these who fly like a cloud
And like doves to their windows? 9“The islands and coastlands will confidently wait for Me;
And the ships of Tarshish will come first,
To bring your sons from far away,
Their silver and gold with them,
For the name of the LORD your God,
For the Holy One of Israel because He has glorified you. 10“Foreigners will build up your walls,
And their kings will serve you;
For in My [righteous] wrath I struck you,
But in My favor and grace I have had compassion on you. 11“Your gates will be open continually;
They shall not be shut day or night,
So that people may bring to you the wealth of the nations—
With their kings led in procession. 12“For the nation or the kingdom which will not serve you [Jerusalem] shall perish,
And the nations [that refuse to serve] shall be utterly ruined. 13“The glory of Lebanon will come to you,
The cypress, the juniper, and the cedar together,
To beautify the place of My sanctuary;
And I will honor and make the place of My feet glorious. 14“The sons of those who oppressed you will come bowing down to you [in submission],
And all those who despised you and treated you disrespectfully will bow down at the soles of your feet,
And they will call you the City of the LORD,
The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. 15“Whereas you [Jerusalem] have been abandoned and hated
With no one passing through,
I will make you an object of pride forever,
A joy from generation to generation. 16“You will suck the milk of the [Gentile] nations
And suck the breast (abundance) of kings;
Then you will recognize and know that I, the LORD, am your Savior
And your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. 17“Instead of bronze I will bring gold,
And instead of iron I will bring silver,
And instead of wood, bronze,
And instead of stones, iron.
And [instead of the tyranny of the present] I will appoint peace as your officers,
And righteousness your rulers. 18“Violence will not be heard again in your land,
Nor devastation or destruction within your borders;
But you will call your walls Salvation, and your gates Praise [to God]. 19“The sun will no longer be your light by day,
Nor shall the bright glow of the moon give light to you,
But the LORD will be an everlasting light for you;
And your God will be your glory and splendor. 20“Your sun will no longer set,
Nor will your moon wane;
For the LORD will be your everlasting light,
And the days of your mourning will be over. 21“Then all your people will be [uncompromisingly and consistently] righteous;
They will possess the land forever,
The branch of My planting,
The work of My hands,
That I may be glorified. 22“The smallest one will become a thousand (a clan),
And the least one a mighty nation.
I, the LORD, will quicken it in its [appointed] time.”

Isaiah 61
Exaltation Of The Afflicted
1The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me,
Because the LORD has anointed and commissioned me
To bring good news to the humble and afflicted;
He has sent me to bind up [the wounds of] the brokenhearted,
To proclaim release [from confinement and condemnation] to the [physical and spiritual] captives
And freedom to prisoners, 2To proclaim the favorable year of the LORD,
And the day of vengeance and retribution of our God,
To comfort all who mourn, 3To grant to those who mourn in Zion the following:
To give them a turban instead of dust [on their heads, a sign of mourning],
The oil of joy instead of mourning,
The garment [expressive] of praise instead of a disheartened spirit.
So they will be called the trees of righteousness [strong and magnificent, distinguished for integrity, justice, and right standing with God],
The planting of the LORD, that He may be glorified. 4Then they will rebuild the ancient ruins,
They will raise up and restore the former desolations;
And they will renew the ruined cities,
The desolations (deserted settlements) of many generations. 5Strangers will stand and feed your flocks,
And foreigners will be your farmers and your vinedressers. 6But you shall be called the priests of the LORD;
People will speak of you as the ministers of our God.
You will eat the wealth of nations,
And you will boast of their riches. 7Instead of your [former] shame you will have a double portion;
And instead of humiliation your people will shout for joy over their portion.
Therefore in their land they will possess double [what they had forfeited];
Everlasting joy will be theirs. 8For I, the LORD, love justice;
I hate robbery with a burnt offering.
And I will faithfully reward them,
And make an everlasting covenant with them. 9Then their offspring will be known among the nations,
And their descendants among the peoples.
All who see them [in their prosperity] will recognize and acknowledge them
That they are the people whom the LORD has blessed. 10I will rejoice greatly in the LORD,
My soul will exult in my God;
For He has clothed me with garments of salvation,
He has covered me with a robe of righteousness,
As a bridegroom puts on a turban,
And as a bride adorns herself with her jewels. 11For as the earth brings forth its sprouts,
And as a garden causes what is sown in it to spring up,
So the Lord GOD will [most certainly] cause righteousness and justice and praise
To spring up before all the nations [through the power of His word].

Isaiah 62
Zion’s Glory And New Name
1For Zion’s sake I (Isaiah) will not be silent,
And for Jerusalem’s sake I will not keep quiet,
Until her righteousness and vindication go forth as brightness,
And her salvation goes forth like a burning torch. 2The nations will see your righteousness and vindication [by God],
And all kings [will see] your glory;
And you will be called by a new name
Which the mouth of the LORD will designate. 3You will also be [considered] a crown of glory and splendor in the hand of the LORD,
And a royal diadem [exceedingly beautiful] in the hand of your God. 4It will no longer be said of you [Judah], “Azubah (Abandoned),”
Nor will it any longer be said of your land, “Shemamah (Desolate)”;
But you will be called, “Hephzibah (My Delight is in Her),”
And your land, “Married”;
For the LORD delights in you,
And to Him your land will be married [owned and protected by the LORD]. 5For as a young man marries a virgin [O Jerusalem],
So your sons will marry you;
And as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride,
So your God will rejoice over you. 6On your walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointed and stationed watchmen (prophets),
Who will never keep silent day or night;
You who profess the LORD, take no rest for yourselves, 7And give Him no rest [from your prayers] until He establishes Jerusalem
And makes her a praise on the earth. 8The LORD has sworn [an oath] by His right hand and by His mighty arm,
“I will never again give your grain as food for your enemies,
Nor will [the invading] foreigners drink your new wine for which you have labored.” 9But they who have harvested it will eat it and praise the LORD,
And they who have gathered it will drink it [at the feasts celebrated] in the courtyards of My sanctuary. 10Go through, go through the gates,
Clear the way for the people;
Build up, build up the highway,
Remove the stones, lift up a banner over the peoples. 11Listen carefully, the LORD has proclaimed to the end of the earth,
Say to the Daughter of Zion, “Look now, your salvation is coming [in the LORD];
Indeed, His reward is with Him, and His restitution accompanies Him.” 12And they will call them “The Holy People,
The Redeemed of the LORD”;
And you will be called “Sought Out, A City Not Deserted.”

Isaiah 63
God’s Vengeance On The Nations
1Who is this who comes from Edom,
With crimson-stained garments from Bozrah [in Edom],
This One (the Messiah) who is majestic in His apparel,
Marching in the greatness of His might?
“It is I, [the One] who speaks in righteousness [proclaiming vindication], mighty to save.” 2Why is Your apparel red,
And Your garments like the one who treads in the wine press? 3“I have trodden the wine trough alone,
And of the peoples there was no one with Me.
I also trod them in My anger
And trampled them in My wrath;
And their lifeblood is sprinkled on My garments,
And I stained all My clothes. 4“For the day of vengeance [against ungodliness] was in My heart,
And My year of redemption [of those who put their trust in Me—the year of My redeemed] has come. 5“I looked, but there was no one to help,
And I was amazed and appalled that there was no one to uphold [truth and right].
So My own arm brought salvation to Me,
And My wrath sustained Me. 6“I trampled the peoples in My anger
And made them drunk with [the cup of] My wrath,
And I spilled their lifeblood on the earth.” God’s Ancient Mercies Recalled 7I will tell of the lovingkindnesses of the LORD, and the praiseworthy deeds of the LORD,
According to all that the LORD has done for us,
And His great goodness toward the house of Israel,
Which He has shown them according to His compassion
And according to the abundance of His lovingkindnesses. 8For He said, “Be assured, they are My people,
Sons who will not be faithless.”
So He became their Savior [in all their distresses]. 9In all their distress He was distressed,
And the angel of His presence saved them,
In His love and in His compassion He redeemed them;
And He lifted them up and carried them all the days of old. 10But they rebelled
And grieved His Holy Spirit;
Therefore He changed into their enemy,
And He fought against them. 11Then His people remembered the days of old, of Moses [and they said],
Where is He who brought our fathers up out of the [Red] Sea, with the shepherds of His flock [Moses and Aaron]?
Where is He who put His Holy Spirit in their midst, 12Who caused His glorious arm and infinite power to go at the right hand of Moses,
Dividing the waters before them to make for Himself an everlasting name, 13Who led them through the depths [of the Red Sea],
Like a horse in the wilderness, [so that] they did not stumble? 14Like the cattle that go down into the valley [to find better pasture and rest],
The Spirit of the LORD gave them rest.
So You led Your people [O LORD]
To make for Yourself a beautiful and glorious name [preparing the way for the acknowledgment of Your name by all nations]. “You Are Our Father” 15Look down from heaven and see from Your lofty dwelling place, holy and glorious.
Where are Your zeal and Your mighty acts [Your miracles which you did for Your people]?
The stirring of Your heart and Your compassion are restrained and withheld from me. 16For [most certainly] You are our Father, even though Abraham [our ancestor] does not know us
And Israel does not acknowledge us.
You, O LORD, are [still] our Father,
Our Redeemer from everlasting is Your name. 17O LORD, why do You cause us to stray from Your ways
And harden our heart from fearing You [with reverence and awe]?
Return for Your servants’ sake, the tribes of Your heritage. 18Your holy people possessed Your sanctuary for [only] a little while;
Our adversaries have trampled it down. 19We have become like those over whom You have never ruled,
Like those who were not called by Your name.

Isaiah 64
Prayer For Mercy And Help
1Oh, that You would tear open the heavens and come down,
That the mountains might quake at Your presence— 2As [sure as] fire kindles the brushwood, as fire causes water to boil—
To make Your name known to Your adversaries,
That the nations may tremble at Your presence! 3When You did awesome and amazing things which we did not expect,
You came down [at Sinai]; the mountains quaked at Your presence. 4For from days of old no one has heard, nor has ear perceived,
Nor has the eye seen a God besides You,
Who works and acts in behalf of the one who [gladly] waits for Him. 5You meet him who rejoices in doing that which is morally right,
Who remembers You in Your ways.
Indeed, You were angry, for we sinned;
We have long continued in our sins [prolonging Your anger].
And shall we be saved [under such circumstances]? 6For we all have become like one who is [ceremonially] unclean [like a leper],
And all our deeds of righteousness are like filthy rags;
We all wither and decay like a leaf,
And our wickedness [our sin, our injustice, our wrongdoing], like the wind, takes us away [carrying us far from God’s favor, toward destruction]. 7There is no one who calls on Your name,
Who awakens and causes himself to take hold of You;
For You have hidden Your face from us
And have handed us over to the [consuming and destructive] power of our wickedness [our sin, our injustice, our wrongdoing]. 8Yet, O LORD, You are our Father;
We are the clay, and You our Potter,
And we all are the work of Your hand. 9Do not be angry beyond measure, O LORD,
Do not remember our wickedness [our sin, our injustice, our wrongdoing] forever.
Now look, consider, for we are all Your people. 10Your holy cities have become a wilderness,
Zion has become a wilderness,
Jerusalem a desolation. 11Our holy and beautiful house [the temple built by Solomon],
Where our fathers praised You,
Has been burned by fire;
And all our precious objects are in ruins. 12Considering these [tragedies], will You restrain Yourself, O LORD [and not help us]?
Will You keep silent and humiliate and oppress us beyond measure?

Isaiah 65
A Rebellious People
1“I let Myself be sought by those who did not ask for Me;
I let Myself be found by those who did not seek Me.
I said, ‘Here am I, here am I,’
To the nation [Israel] which did not call on My Name. 2“I have spread out My hands all the day long to a rebellious and stubborn people,
Who walk in the way that is not good, [following] after their own thoughts and intentions, 3The people who continually provoke Me to My face,
Sacrificing [to idols] in gardens and making offerings with incense on bricks [instead of at the designated altar]; 4Who sit among the graves [trying to conjure up evil spirits] and spend the night in the secret places [where spirits are thought to dwell];
Who eat swine’s flesh,
And their pots hold the broth of unclean meat; 5Who say, ‘Keep to yourself, do not come near me,
For I am too holy for you [and you might defile me]!’
These [people] are smoke in My nostrils,
A fire that burns all the day. 6“Indeed, it is written before Me,
I will not keep silent, but I will repay;
I will even repay it [directly] into their arms, 7Both your own wickedness and the wickedness of your fathers,” says the LORD.
“Since they too have made offerings with incense on the mountains
And scorned and taunted Me on the hills,
I therefore will measure [punishment for] their former work [directly] into their arms.”
8This is what the LORD says, “As the new wine is found in the cluster,
And one says, ‘Do not destroy it, for there is a blessing and benefit in it,’
So I will do for the sake of My servants
In order not to destroy all of them. 9“I will bring forth descendants from Jacob,
And an heir of My mountains from Judah;
Even My chosen ones shall inherit it,
And My servants will live there. 10“And [the plain of] Sharon will be a place for flocks to graze,
And the Valley of Achor a resting place for herds,
For My people who seek Me [who long for Me and require My presence in their lives]. 11“But you who abandon (turn away from) the LORD,
Who forget and ignore My holy mountain (Zion),
Who set a table for Gad [the Babylonian god of fortune],
And who fill a jug of mixed wine for Meni [the god of fate], 12I will destine you for the sword, [says the LORD],
And all of you will bow down to the slaughter,
Because when I called, you did not answer;
When I spoke, you did not listen or obey.
But you did [what was] evil in My sight
And chose that in which I did not delight.”
13Therefore, the Lord GOD says this, “Listen carefully, My servants will eat, but you will be hungry;
Indeed, My servants will drink, but you will be thirsty;
Indeed, My servants will rejoice, but you will be put to shame. 14“Indeed, My servants will shout for joy from a happy heart,
But you will cry out with a heavy heart,
And you shall wail and howl from a broken spirit. 15“And you will leave your name behind to My chosen ones [who will use it] as a curse,
And the Lord GOD will put you to death,
But He will call His servants by another name [a much greater name, just as the name Israel was greater than the name Jacob]. 16“Because he who blesses himself on the earth
Will bless himself by the God of truth and faithfulness;
And he who swears [an oath] on the earth
Will swear by the God of truth and faithfulness;
Because the former troubles are forgotten,
And because they are hidden from My sight. New Heavens and a New Earth 17“Behold, I am creating new heavens and a new earth;
And the former things [of life] will not be remembered or come to mind. 18“But be glad and rejoice forever over what I create;
Behold, I am creating Jerusalem to be a source of rejoicing
And her people a joy. 19“I will also rejoice in Jerusalem and be glad in My people;
And there will no longer be heard in her
The voice of weeping and the sound of crying. 20“No longer shall there be in it an infant who lives only a few days,
Or an old man who does not finish his days;
For the youth who dies at the age of a hundred,
And the one who does not reach the age of a hundred
Will be thought of as accursed. 21“They will build houses and live in them;
They will plant vineyards and eat the fruit. 22“They will not build and another occupy;
They will not plant and another eat [the fruit].
For as the lifetime of a tree, so will be the days of My people,
And My chosen [people] will fully enjoy [and long make use of] the work of their hands. 23“They will not labor in vain,
Or bear children for disaster;
For they are the descendants of those blessed by the LORD,
And their offspring with them.
24“It shall also come to pass that before they call, I will answer; and while they are still speaking, I will hear. 25“The wolf and the lamb will graze together, and the lion will eat straw like the ox [there will no longer be predator and prey]; and dust will be the serpent’s food. They will do no evil or harm in all My holy mountain (Zion),” says the LORD.

Isaiah 66
Heaven Is God’s Throne
1This is what the LORD says, “Heaven is My throne and the earth is My footstool.
Where, then, is a house that you could build for Me?
And where will My resting place be? 2“For all these things My hand has made,
So all these things came into being [by and for Me],” declares the LORD.
“But to this one I will look [graciously],
To him who is humble and contrite in spirit, and who [reverently] trembles at My word and honors My commands. Hypocrisy Rebuked 3“He who kills an ox [for pagan sacrifice] is [as guilty] as one who kills a man;
He who sacrifices a lamb, as one who breaks a dog’s neck;
He who offers a grain offering, as one who offers swine’s blood;
He who offers incense, as one who blesses an idol.
Such people have chosen their own ways,
And their soul delights in their repulsive acts; 4So I will choose their punishments,
And will bring the things they dread upon them
Because I called, but no one answered;
I spoke, but they did not listen or obey.
But they did evil in My sight
And chose that in which I did not delight.” 5Hear the word of the LORD, you who tremble [with awe-filled reverence] at His word:
“Your brothers who hate you, who exclude you for My Name’s sake,
Have said, ‘Let the LORD be glorified, that we may see your joy.’
But they will be put to shame. 6“The sound of an uproar from the city! A voice from the temple!
The voice of the LORD, providing retribution to His enemies. 7“Before she (Zion) was in labor, she gave birth;
Before her labor pain came, she gave birth to a boy. 8“Who has heard of such a thing? Who has seen such things?
Can a land be born in one day?
Or can a nation be brought forth in a moment?
As soon as Zion was in labor, she also brought forth her sons. 9“Shall I bring to the moment of birth and not give delivery?” says the LORD.
“Or shall I who gives delivery shut the womb?” says your God. Joy in Jerusalem’s Future 10“Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad for her, all you who love her;
Rejoice greatly with her, all you who mourn over her, 11That you may nurse and be satisfied with her comforting breasts,
That you may drink deeply and be delighted with her bountiful bosom.” 12For the LORD says this, “Behold, I extend peace to her (Jerusalem) like a river,
And the glory of the nations like an overflowing stream;
And you will be nursed, you will be carried on her hip and [playfully] rocked on her knees. 13“As one whom his mother comforts, so I will comfort you;
And you will be comforted in Jerusalem.” 14When you see this, your heart will rejoice;
Your bones will flourish like new grass.
And the [powerful] hand of the LORD will be revealed to His servants,
But His indignation will be toward His enemies. 15For indeed, the LORD will come in fire
And His chariots will be like the stormy wind,
To render His anger with rage,
And His rebuke with flames of fire. 16For the LORD will execute judgment by fire
And by His sword on all mankind,
And those slain by the LORD will be many. 17“Those who [vainly attempt to] sanctify and cleanse themselves to go to the gardens [to sacrifice to idols],
Following after one in the center,
Who eat swine’s flesh, detestable things and mice,
Will come to an end together,” says the LORD.
18“For I know their works and their thoughts. The time is coming to gather all nations and languages, and they will come and see My glory. 19I will set up a [miraculous] sign among them, and from them I will send survivors to the nations: Tarshish, Pul (Put), Lud, Meshech, Tubal and Javan, to the distant islands and coastlands that have not heard of My fame nor seen My glory. And they will declare and proclaim My glory among the nations. 20“Then they shall bring all your countrymen (children of Israel) from all the nations as a grain offering to the LORD—on horses, in chariots, in litters, on mules and on camels—to My holy mountain Jerusalem,” says the LORD, “just as the sons of Israel bring their grain offering in a clean vessel to the house of the LORD. 21“I will also take some of them as priests and Levites,” says the LORD. 22“For just as the new heavens and the new earth
Which I make will remain and endure before Me,” declares the LORD,
“So your offspring and your name will remain and endure. 23“And it shall be that from New Moon to New Moon
And from Sabbath to Sabbath,
All mankind will come to bow down and worship before Me,” says the LORD. 24“Then they will go forth and look
Upon the dead bodies of the [rebellious] men
Who have transgressed against Me;
For their worm (maggot) will not die,
And their fire will not go out;
And they will be an abhorrence to all mankind.”

